<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Principal Events 1918</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="events.css"/>
</head>

<body>

<p class="note">This work derives from <em>Principle Events 1914-1918</em>, compiled by The Historical Section of the Committee of Imperial Defence, and originally published by H.M. Stationery Office, in 1922; as part of the <em>History of the Great War</em>. It was prepared from the OCR text of the PDF copy held by the Internet Archive (<a href="https://archive.org/search?query=external-identifier%3A%22urn%3Aoclc%3Arecord%3A1050840522%22">urn:oclc:record:1050840522</a>).</p>
<p class="note">Only Part I of the book - the general chronological list - is reproduced in this work. Parts II and III give different presentations of entries in Part I. An ongoing effort will introduce semantic mark-up, with a view to being able to derive the presentation in Parts II and III (and more) from the chronological list.</p>
<p><a href="events-1914-15.xhtml#1914">1914</a>, <a href="events-1914-15.xhtml#1915">1915</a>, <a href="events-1916.xhtml#1916">1916</a>, <a href="events-1917.xhtml#1917">1917</a>, <a href="#1918">1918</a></p>

<h2>Principal Events 1914-1918</h2>
<hr class="chap"/>

<h2 id="1918">1918</h2>

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-01-01">January 1</span></p>
<p>Arab forces begin <span class="op">Actions for Et Tafile</span><span class="ref"> (see 28th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">M. Hyams</span> succeeds <span class="person">Baron de Broqueville</span> as <span class="role">Belgian Minister for Foreign Affairs</span><span class="ref"> (see August 4th, 1917)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-01-02">January 2</span></p>
<p>Air Ministry formed in Great Britain.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-01-03">January 3</span></p>
<p>The Air Council takes over functions of Air Board<span class="ref"> (see May 17th, 1916, and November 29th and December 21st, 1917)</span>.</p>
<p>Ukraine delegation reaches Brest-Litovsk<span class="ref"> (see November 21st, 1917, and February 1st, 1918)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-01-04">January 4</span></p>
<p>British hospital ship "<span class="vessel">Rewa</span>" sunk by submarine in Bristol Channel.</p>
<p><span class="polity">Russian Bolshevik Government</span> and French and Swedish Governments recognise the independence of Finland<span class="ref"> (see 10th, and December 6th, 1917)</span>.</p>
<p>British Government in message to the King of the Hejaz declare intentions with regard to future status of Palestine<span class="ref"> (see December 17th, 1917, and February 4th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p>Allied request for handing over of Dutch ships in Allied ports formulated<span class="ref"> (see March 7th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-01-05">January 5</span></p>
<p><span class="role" content="British Prime Minister">British Premier</span> (<span class="person">Mr. Lloyd George</span>) in speech to Trade Union delegates outlines British War Aims<span class="ref"> (see 24th, and December 28th, 1917)</span>.</p>
<p>Negotiations again suspended on Russian front. Bolshevik demand made for meetings to be held at Stockholm<span class="ref"> (see 8th, and December 6th, 13th and 22nd, 1917)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-01-08">January 8</span></p>
<p>Qasr-i-Shirin (Western Persia) occupied by British forces<span class="ref"> (see July 8th, 1917)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">President Wilson</span> delivers Message to Congress laying down the "<a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fourteen_Points">Fourteen Points</a>"<span class="ref"> (see February 11th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="polity">Russian Bolshevik Government</span> withdraw demand for transfer to Stockholm and resume negotiations at Brest-Litovsk<span class="ref"> (see 5th and 22nd)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-01-10">January 10</span></p>
<p>British Government assure <span class="polity">Russian Bolshevik Government</span> of their support in the creation of an independent Poland<span class="ref"> (see April 5th, 1917, and February 20th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p>Danish and Norwegian Governments recognise the independence of Finland<span class="ref"> (see 4th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-01-12">January 12</span></p>
<p>Latvia declares independence<span class="ref"> (see November 11th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-01-13">January 13</span></p>
<p>Estonian Government issue declaration of independence<span class="ref"> (see November 28th, 1917, and February 25th and November 11th, 1918)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-01-14">January 14</span></p>
<p>German destroyers bombard Yarmouth (Norfolk).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-01-18">January 18</span></p>
<p>Russian Constituent Assembly again meet in Petrograd<span class="ref"> (see 19th, and December 13th, 1917)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-01-19">January 19</span></p>
<p>Russian Constituent Assembly again forcibly dissolved by <span class="polity" content="Russian Bolshevik Government">Bolsheviki</span><span class="ref"> (see 18th, and December 13th, 1917)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Mustaufi ul Mamalek</span> succeeds <span class="person">Ain ed Douleh</span> as <span class="role">Persian Prime Minister</span><span class="ref"> (see November 24th, 1917, and May 3rd, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Mushaver ul Mamalek</span> succeeds <span class="person">Ala es Sultaneh</span> as <span class="role">Persian Foreign Minister</span><span class="ref"> (see June 6th, 1917, and August 10th, 1918)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-01-20">January 20</span></p>
<p>Naval action outside the Dardanelles. German cruiser "<span class="vessel">Breslau</span>" and British monitor "<span class="vessel">Raglan</span>" sunk. "<span class="vessel">Goeben</span>" strikes mine and is beached<span class="ref"> (see 27th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-01-22">January 22</span></p>
<p><span class="polity">Russian Bolshevik Government</span> accuse Central Powers of falsification of reports of proceedings<span class="ref"> (see 8th and 23rd)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-01-23">January 23</span></p>
<p>Negotiations between <span class="polity">Russian Bolshevik Government</span> and Central Powers once more suspended<span class="ref"> (see 8th, 22nd and 30th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-01-24">January 24</span></p>
<p><span class="person">Count Hertling</span> and <span class="person">Count Czernin</span> (<span class="role">German Imperial Chancellor</span> and <span class="role" content="Austro-Hungarian Foreign Minister">Austrian Foreign Minister</span>) make public replies to statements of <span class="person">President Wilson</span> and <span class="person">Mr. Lloyd George</span> on War Aims<span class="ref"> (see 5th and 8th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Lieut.-General The Hon. Sir H. A. Lawrence</span> appointed <span class="role">Chief of the General Staff, British Expeditionary Force</span>, France<span class="ref"> (see 27th)</span>. Did not take up appointment till the 27th.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-01-27">January 27</span></p>
<p>Turkish Dead Sea Flotilla seized by Arab camelry at El Mezraa'.</p>
<p><span class="person">General Dunsterville</span>'s Mission leaves Baghdad for North-West Persia<span class="ref"> (see February 17th)</span>.</p>
<p>The "<span class="vessel">Goeben</span>" refloated inside the Dardanelles<span class="ref"> (see 20th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Lieut.-General Sir L. E. Kiggell</span>, <span class="role">Chief of the General Staff, British Expeditionary Force</span>, France, resigns<span class="ref"> (see 24th, and December 22nd, 1915)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-01-28">January 28</span></p>
<p><span class="polity">Russian Bolshevik Government</span> sever diplomatic relations with Rumania.</p>
<p><span class="op">Actions for Et Tafile</span> by the Arab forces end<span class="ref"> (see 1st)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-01-30">January 30</span></p>
<p>Negotiations between <span class="polity">Russian Bolshevik Government</span> and Central Powers again resumed<span class="ref"> (see 23rd, and February 10th)</span>.</p>

</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-02-01">February 1</span></p>
<p>Central Powers recognise the Ukraine Republic<span class="ref"> (see 9th, and November 20th, 1917)</span>.</p>
<p>Extension of the British East Persia Cordon<span class="ref"> (see July 29th, 1915)</span> into Khorasan begins. In relief of Russian forces withdrawn by Bolshevik Government.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-02-03">February 3</span></p>
<p>British Government announce enlargement of powers of Supreme War Council at Versailles<span class="ref"> (see November 7th, 1917, and December 1st, 1917)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-02-04">February 4</span></p>
<p><span class="person">General Alexeiev</span> with Don Cossacks moves towards Moscow against the Bolshevik forces<span class="ref"> (see 13th)</span>.</p>
<p>British Government make declaration to King of the Hejaz re-affirming their pledges as to freeing the Arab peoples (see October 24th, 1915, December 15th, 1916, December 17th, 1917, and January 4th, 1918).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-02-05">February 5</span></p>
<p>British S.S. "<span class="vessel">Tuscania</span>," carrying United States troops, sunk by submarine off Irish coast. (The only loss sustained by U.S. transports when under British naval escort.)</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-02-06">February 6</span></p>
<p>German Government send ultimatum to Rumania demanding peace negotiations within four days<span class="ref"> (see 25th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">M. Bratianu</span>, <span class="role">Rumanian Premier</span>, resigns (appointed January 14th, 1914)<span class="ref"> (see 9th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-02-09">February 9</span></p>
<p>Peace signed at Brest-Litovsk between Bulgaria, Central Powers and Turkey and the Ukraine Rada; also supplementary Treaty between Central Powers and The Ukraine; borders of new Ukrainian State defined<span class="ref"> (see 1st, and January 3rd)</span>.</p>
<p>New Rumanian Cabinet formed, with <span class="person">General Averescu</span> as <span class="role" content="Rumanian Premier">Premier</span> and <span class="role" content="Rumanian Foreign Minister">Foreign Minister</span><span class="ref"> (see 6th, and March 12th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-02-10">February 10</span></p>
<p><span class="person">M. Trotski</span> announces that state of war between Russia and Central Powers, Bulgaria and Turkey is ended, but that Russia will not sign formal peace treaty<span class="ref"> (see 18th, and January 30th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-02-11">February 11</span></p>
<p><span class="person">President Wilson</span> delivers Message to Congress laying down four additional Points<span class="ref"> (see January 8th and October 6th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-02-13">February 13</span></p>
<p><span class="person">General Alexeiev</span> defeated by the <span class="polity" content="Russian Bolshevik Government">Bolsheviki</span><span class="ref"> (see 4th)</span>; <span class="person">General Kaledin</span> commits suicide.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-02-15">February 15</span></p>
<p>Third German destroyer raid in Straits of Dover (night 15th/16th)<span class="ref"> (see April 20th, 1017)</span>.</p>
<p>Representatives of Allied Governments arrange establishment of the "Allied Maritime Transport Council"<span class="ref"> (see December 3rd, 1917, and March 11th, 1918)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-02-10">February 10</span></p>
<p>Dover shelled by German submarine.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-02-17">February 17</span></p>
<p><span class="person">General Dunsterville</span>'s Mission reaches Enzeli (North-West Persia)<span class="ref"> (see May 21st, 1915, January 27th and April 1st, 1918)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-02-18">February 18</span></p>
<p>Armistice terminates on Russian front. Hostilities resumed by German armies<span class="ref"> (see 10th and 19th)</span>. Dvinsk taken by German forces.</p>
<p><span class="person">General Sir W. Robertson</span>, <span class="role">Chief of the British Imperial General Staff</span>, resigns<span class="ref"> (see 19th, and December 23rd, 1915)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-02-19">February 19</span></p>
<p><span class="polity">Russian Bolshevik Government</span> notify willingness to sign Peace Treaty with Germany<span class="ref"> (see 18th and 28th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">General Sir H. H. Wilson</span> appointed <span class="role">Chief of the British Imperial General Staff</span><span class="ref"> (see 18th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-02-20">February 20</span></p>
<p><span class="role" content="British Foreign Secretary">British Foreign Minister</span> (<span class="person" content="Arthur Balfour">Mr. Balfour</span>) informs Polish National Committee that Great Britain does not accept the treaty between The Ukraine and Central Powers<span class="ref"> (see 9th, January 10th, and June 3rd)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-02-21">February 21</span></p>
<p>Jericho taken by British forces (19th/21st).</p>
<p>Ministry of Information formed in Great Britain.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-02-23">February 23</span></p>
<p>Inter-Allied Labour and Socialist Conference in London pass resolution as to War Aims.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-02-24">February 24</span></p>
<p>Trebizond (Asia Minor) retaken by Turkish forces<span class="ref"> (see April 17th, 1916)</span>.</p>
<p>Dorpat (Estonia) occupied by German forces<span class="ref"> (see December 26th)</span>.</p>
<p>German raider "<span class="vessel">Wolff</span>" returns to Germany<span class="ref"> (see December 1st, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-02-25">February 25</span></p>
<p>Pernau, Reval, and Pskov taken by German forces<span class="ref"> (see 18th)</span>.</p>
<p>Kirmanshah (Western Persia) occupied by British forces<span class="ref"> (see March 11th, 1917)</span>.</p>
<p>Peace negotiations begun at Bukharest<span class="ref"> (see 6th, and March 5th)</span>.</p>
<p>Military Convention signed at Bobruisk between Germany and Poland.</p>
<p>British Government inform <span class="person">M. Tonisson</span> that they are prepared provisionally to recognise the independence of Estonia until the future status of Estonia is settled by the Peace Congress<span class="ref"> (see January 13th and November 11th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-02-26">February 26</span></p>
<p>British hospital ship "<span class="vessel">Glenart Castle</span>" sunk by submarine in the Bristol Channel<span class="ref"> (see March 1st, 1917)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-02-28">February 28</span></p>
<p>Negotiations again resumed between <span class="polity">Russian Bolshevik Government</span> and Central Powers: hostilities nominally cease<span class="ref"> (see 18th, 19th, and March 3rd)</span>.</p>


</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-03-01">March 1</span></p>
<p>Treaty of Peace and Amity signed between the Finnish Social Republic of Workmen and the Russian Federal Soviet Republic.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-03-02">March 2</span></p>
<p>Kiev (Ukraine) captured by German forces<span class="ref"> (see December 20th)</span>.</p>
<p>German force landed in the Aaland Islands at request of Finnish Government<span class="ref"> (see 3rd)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-03-03">March 3</span></p>
<p>Meshed (Persia) occupied by troops of British East Persia Cordon. Approximate date.</p>
<p>Peace signed between Bolshevik Russia and Central Powers, Bulgaria and Turkey at Brest-Litovsk, together with supplementary treaties by the signatories<span class="ref"> (see 14th and 18th, February 28th and August 27th)</span>.</p>
<p>German Government notify Swedish Government of occupation of the Aaland Islands<span class="ref"> (see 2nd)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-03-04">March 4</span></p>
<p>Narva (Estonia) occupied by German forces<span class="ref"> (see November 28th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-03-05">March 5</span></p>
<p>Preliminary treaty of peace between Rumania and the Central Powers, Bulgaria and Turkey signed at Buftea<span class="ref"> (see December 9th, 1917, and February 25th and May 7th, 1918)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-03-07">March 7</span></p>
<p>First German aeroplane raid on England undertaken on moonless night<span class="ref"> (see July 20th)</span>.</p>
<p>Peace signed at Berlin between Germany and Finland.</p>
<p>Final Allied Note presented to Netherlands Government <i>re</i> surrender of Dutch ships in Allied ports<span class="ref"> (see 18th, and January 4th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-03-08">March 8</span></p>
<p><span class="person">M. Chichérin</span> appointed Russian Foreign Minister and <span class="person">M. Trotski</span> appointed <span class="role" content="Russian Minister for War">Minister for War</span><span class="ref"> (see November 8th, 1917)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-03-09">March 9</span></p>
<p>Hit (on the Euphrates) occupied by British forces.</p>
<p>Treaty of Peace signed between Rumania and Bolshevik Russia<span class="ref"> (see 5th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-03-10">March 10</span></p>
<p>British hospital ship "<span class="vessel">Guildford Castle</span>" attacked by German submarine in Bristol Channel, but reaches port.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-03-11">March 11</span></p>
<p>First meeting of the Allied Maritime Transport Council<span class="ref"> (see February 15th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-03-12">March 12</span></p>
<p>Erzerum retaken by Turkish forces<span class="ref"> (see February 16th, 1916)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">General Averescu</span>, <span class="role">Rumanian Premier</span> and <span class="role" content="Rumanian Foreign Minister">Foreign Minister</span>, resigns<span class="ref"> (see 21st, and February 9th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-03-13">March 13</span></p>
<p>Odessa occupied by German forces (ses December 11th).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-03-14">March 14</span></p>
<p>Congress of Soviets meet at Moscow to ratify treaty of peace with Central Powers<span class="ref"> (see 3rd)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-03-15">March 15</span></p>
<p>German Government proclaim protectorate over an independent Kurland.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-03-16">March 16</span></p>
<p>Hamadan (West Persia) evacuated by the Russian regular forces<span class="ref"> (see March 2nd, 1917)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-03-17">March 17</span></p>
<p>Nicolaiev (South Russia) captured by German forces<span class="ref"> (see April 8th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-03-18">March 18</span></p>
<p>Entente Governments issue Note refusing to recognise Russo-German peace treaty<span class="ref"> (see 3rd and 14th)</span>.</p>
<p>Dutch Government accept with reservations the Allied terms for use of Dutch shipping in United States and Entente ports<span class="ref"> (see 7th and 21st)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-03-20">March 20</span></p>
<p>Allied Blockade Committee formed.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-03-21">March 21</span></p>
<p><span class="op">First Battles of the Somme, 1918</span>, begin with Battle of St. Quentin (21st/23rd)<span class="ref"> (see November 18th, 1910, and April 5th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Passage of the Jordan</span> by British forces (21st/23rd).</p>
<p>Destroyer action in North Sea between Allied and German flotillas<span class="ref"> (see October 17th, 1914)</span>.</p>
<p>Dutch ships in British ports requisitioned by British Government, and Dutch ships in United States ports requisitioned by United States Government<span class="ref"> (see 18th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">M. Marghiloman</span> appointed <span class="role">Rumanian Premier</span><span class="ref"> (see 12th, and November 8th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">M. Constantino Arian</span> appointed <span class="role">Rumanian Foreign Minister</span><span class="ref"> (see 12th, and November 8th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-03-23">March 23</span></p>
<p>Paris first shelled by long range gun (from Crépy-en-Valois, 75 miles distant)<span class="ref"> (see August 15th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-03-24">March 24</span></p>
<p><span class="op">First Battle of Bapaume</span> (24th/25th): Bapaume and Péronne taken</p>
<p>by German forces<span class="ref"> (see March 17th and 18th, 1917, and August 29th and September 1st, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">First action of Es Salt</span> (Palestine) (24th/25th).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-03-25">March 25</span></p>
<p>Noyon taken by German forces<span class="ref"> (see March 18th, 1917, and August 29th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p>German airship raid on Naples from the Dalmatian coast.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-03-26">March 26</span></p>
<p>Albert, Chaulnes, and Roye taken by German forces<span class="ref"> (see March 17th, 1917, and August 22nd and 27th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Action of Khan Baghdadi</span> (Mesopotamia) (26th/27th).</p>
<p>"Doullens Agreement" concluded. Decision taken to appoint</p>
<p><span class="person">General Foch</span> to co-ordinate efforts of British and French Armies<span class="ref"> (see April 14th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-03-27">March 27</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Rosières</span> (Somme) (26th/27th).</p>
<p>Montdidier taken by German forces<span class="ref"> (see August 10th)</span>.</p>
<p>First British attack on Amman (Palestine) (27th/30th).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-03-28">March 28</span></p>
<p><span class="op">First Battle of Arras, 1918</span><span class="ref"> (see August 26th)</span>.</p>
<p>Ana (Mesopotamia) occupied by British forces.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-03-29">March 29</span></p>
<p>Poltava (South Russia) captured by German forces.</p>

</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-04-01">April 1</span></p>
<p>Enzeli (Persia) evacuated by the Russian regular forces<span class="ref"> (see February 17th)</span>.</p>
<p>German Expeditionary Force for Finland leaves Danzig<span class="ref"> (see 3rd)</span>.</p>
<p>Royal Flying Corps and Royal Naval Air Services of Great Britain amalgamated and established a separate service as the Royal Air Force.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-04-03">April 3</span></p>
<p>German Expeditionary Force lands in South Finland at Hangö<span class="ref"> (see 1st, 13th, and December 16th)</span>.</p>
<p>Ekaterinoslav (South Russia) taken by German forces.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-04-04">April 4</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the Avre</span> (France).</p>
<p>Sarikamish (Russian Caucasus) occupied by Turkish Eorces<span class="ref"> (see January 2nd, 1915)</span>.</p>
<p>British submarines at Helsingfors destroyed to avoid capture (3rd/4th)<span class="ref"> (see 3rd)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-04-05">April 5</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the Ancre, 1918</span>, brings to an end the <span class="op">First Battles of the Somme, 1918</span><span class="ref"> (see March 21st)</span>.</p>
<p>Japanese and British marines land at Vladivostok<span class="ref"> (see August 2nd and 3rd)</span>.</p>
<p>Van (Armenia) retaken by Turkish forces<span class="ref"> (see May 19th, 1915)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-04-08">April 8</span></p>
<p>Kharkov (South Russia) captured by German forces.</p></div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-04-09">April 9</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battles of the Lys</span> begin<span class="ref"> (see 29th)</span>: <span class="op">Battle of Estaires</span> (9th/11th); Neuve Chapelle taken by German forces.</p>
<p><span class="person">Count Mirbach</span> appointed <span class="role">German Ambassador at Moscow</span><span class="ref"> (see July 6th)</span>.</p>
<p>National Council of the Moldavian Republic (Bessarabia) pass Act of Union with Rumania, with stipulation for local autonomy<span class="ref"> (see 16th, December 23rd, 1917, and December 10th, 1918)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-04-10">April 10</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Messines, 1918</span> (10th/11th): Messines taken by German forces<span class="ref"> (see June 14th, 1917, and September 28th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p>Monrovia (Liberia) bombarded by a German submarine<span class="ref"> (see August 4th, 1917)</span>.</p>
<p>Third Military Service Act passed in British Parliament. Military age limit raised to 50, and Conscription extended to Ireland<span class="ref"> (see 18th, and June 8th, 1916)</span>.</p>
<p>Settlement Treaty between Germany and Turkey ratified at Berlin<span class="ref"> (see January 11th, 1917)</span>.</p>
<p>Agreement reached between Italy and the Yugo-Slavs ("Pact of Rome").</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-04-11">April 11</span></p>
<p>Armentières and Merville taken by German forces<span class="ref"> (see October 11th and 17th, 1914, August 10th and October 3rd, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p>French Government publish text of <span class="person">Emperor of Austria</span>'s letter to <span class="person">Prince Sixte of Bourbon</span> proposing peace negotiations<span class="ref"> (see 15th, and March 31st, 1917)</span>.</p>
<p style="display:none"><span class="op">Battle of Estaires</span> ends.</p>
<p style="display:none"><span class="op">Battle of Messines</span> ends.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-04-12">April 12</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Hazebrouck</span> (Lys) begins<span class="ref"> (see 15th)</span>.</p>
<p>Last airship raid over England in which casualties were inflicted (27)<span class="ref"> (see January 19th, 1915, and August 5th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Field Marshal Sir Douglas Haig</span> issues Order of the Day to the British Army in France on the serious situation ("Backs to the Wall" order).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-04-13">April 13</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Bailleul</span> (Lys) begins<span class="ref"> (see 15th)</span>.</p>
<p>Helsingfors (Finland) captured by German forces (12th/14th)<span class="ref"> (see 3rd and 4th)</span>.</p>
<p>Finnish Government announce that all German troops landed in Finland had been despatched at their request.</p>
<p>United Diets of Baltic Provinces adopt resolution to form themselves into a separate State within the German Empire.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-04-14">April 14</span></p>
<p><span class="person">General Foch</span> appointed Commander-in-Chief of Allied Armies in France<span class="ref"> (see March 26th, August 6th, and November 5th)</span>. The Belgian forces were not placed under the command of <span class="person">General Foch</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-04-15">April 15</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Hazebrouck</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see 12th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Bailleul</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see 13th)</span>. Bailleul taken by the German forces<span class="ref"> (see October 14th, 1914, and August 30th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p>Raid by British naval light forces on the Kattegat<span class="ref"> (see November 2nd, 1917)</span>.</p>
<p>Batum (Georgia) occupied by Turkish forces<span class="ref"> (see December 27th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Count Czernin</span>, <span class="role">Austro-Hungarian Foreign Minister</span>, resigns<span class="ref"> (see 17th, and December 22nd, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-04-16">April 16</span></p>
<p>Passchendaele reoccupied by German forces<span class="ref"> (see November 6th, 1917, and September 29th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p>The Ukraine Government issue protest against union of Bessarabia and Rumania<span class="ref"> (see 9th and 23rd)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-04-17">April 17</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Kemmel Ridge</span> (Lys) begins<span class="ref"> (see 19th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Baron Burian</span> succeeds <span class="person">Count Czernin</span> as <span class="role">Austro-Hungarian Foreign Minister</span><span class="ref"> (see 15th, and October 25th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Dr. Wekerle</span>, <span class="role">Hungarian Premier</span>, resigns<span class="ref"> (see 27th, and August 21st, 1917)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-04-18">April 18</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Bethune</span> (Lys).</p>
<p>Third Military Service Act comes into operation in Great Britain<span class="ref"> (see 10th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-04-19">April 19</span></p>
<p>German forces enter the Crimea.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Kemmel Ridge</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see 17th and 26th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-04-20">April 20</span></p>
<p><span class="person">Lord Derby</span>, <span class="role">Secretary of State for War, Great Britain</span>, resigns<span class="ref"> (see December 11th, 1916)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Viscount Milner</span> appointed <span class="role">Secretary of State for War, Great Britain</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-04-21">April 21</span></p>
<p><span class="person">Viscount Motono</span>, <span class="role">Japanese Minister for Foreign Affairs</span>, resigns<span class="ref"> (see 22nd, and November 21st, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-04-22">April 22</span></p>
<p>The Trans-Caucasian Council decide to declare independence (night 22nd/23rd)<span class="ref"> (see September 20th, 1917, and May 6th and 26th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Baron Goto</span> appointed <span class="role">Japanese Minister for Foreign Affairs</span><span class="ref"> (see 21st, and September 28th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-04-23">April 23</span></p>
<p>Blocking raid by British naval light forces on Ostend and Zeebrugge<span class="ref"> (see May 9th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="polity">Russian Bolshevik Government</span> issue protest against union of Bessarabia and Rumania<span class="ref"> (see 9th and 16th, and December 10th)</span>.</p>
<p>Guatemala declares war on Germany<span class="ref"> (see April 27th, 1917)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-04-24">April 24</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Actions of Villers-Bretonneux</span> (Somme) (24th/25th).</p></div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-04-26">April 26</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Second Battle of Kemmel Ridge</span> (25th/26th): Mount Kemmel stormed by German forces<span class="ref"> (see 19th, and August 31st)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-04-27">April 27</span></p>
<p>Kars (Georgia) occupied by Turkish forces. First contingent of Italian troops arrive on the French front (approximate date).</p>
<p><span class="person">Dr. Wekerle</span> again appointed <span class="role" content="Hungarian Premier">Hungarian Prime Minister</span><span class="ref"> (see 17th, and October 24)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-04-29">April 29</span></p>
<p>The <span class="op">Battle of the Scherpenberg</span> brings to an end the <span class="op">Battles of the Lys</span><span class="ref"> (see 9th)</span>.</p>
<p>German Government establish a military dictatorship in The Ukraine. <span class="person">General Skoropadski</span> proclaimed Hetman<span class="ref"> (see May 9th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-04-30">April 30</span></p>
<p>Viborg (Finland) captured by German forces and Finnish White Guards<span class="ref"> (see 13th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Second action of Es Salt</span> (Palestine) begins<span class="ref"> (see May 4th)</span>.</p>

</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-05-01">May 1</span></p>
<p>Sevastopol taken by German forces (April 30th/May 1st).</p>
<p>Part of Russian Black Sea Fleet seized by the Germans<span class="ref"> (see June 21st, 1917, and June 18th and November 26th, 1918)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-05-02">May 2</span></p>
<p>Agreement concluded regarding export of sand and gravel from The Netherlands for German use<span class="ref"> (see July 15th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-05-03">May 3</span></p>
<p><span class="person">Samsam es Sultaneh</span> succeeds <span class="person">Mustaufi ul Mamalek</span> as <span class="role">Persian Prime Minister</span><span class="ref"> (see 31st, and January 19th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-05-04">May 4</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Second action of Es Salt</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see April 30th)</span>.</p>
<p>Armistice signed at Korenevo between Russia and The Ukraine (German-Ukrainian Command)<span class="ref"> (see June 12th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-05-05">May 5</span></p>
<p><span class="person">Field-Marshal Lord French</span> appointed Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland<span class="ref"> (see December 15th, 1915)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-05-06">May 6</span></p>
<p>Turko-German delegates arrive at Batum to negotiate peace with the Georgians and Armenians<span class="ref"> (see April 22nd, May 20th, and June 8th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-05-07">May 7</span></p>
<p>Kirkuk (Mesopotamia) taken by British forces<span class="ref"> (see 24th)</span>.</p>
<p>Frederickshamn (South Finland) captured by Finnish White Guards: End of the Finnish Civil War. The civil war may be said to have begun about March 1st, 1918.</p>
<p>Final Treaty of Peace signed between Rumania and Bulgaria, Central Powers and Turkey<span class="ref"> (see March 5th)</span>, together with various supplementary treaties between the separate contracting parties<span class="ref"> (see November 10th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-05-08">May 8</span></p>
<p>Nicaragua declares war on Germany and on Austria-Hungary<span class="ref"> (see May 18th, 1917)</span>.</p>
<p>Rostov (South Russia) captured by German forces.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-05-09">May 9</span></p>
<p>Blocking attack on Ostend. H.M.S. "<span class="vessel">Vindictive</span>" sunk to block the harbour<span class="ref"> (see April 23rd)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">M. Ustemovich</span> proclaimed President of The Ukraine; <span class="person">General Skoropadski</span> remains Hetman<span class="ref"> (see April 29th)</span>.</p>
<p>Joint Trade Committee of Entente Powers formed in Holland.</p>
<p><span class="person">Dr. da Silva Paes</span>, elected <span class="role">Portuguese President</span><span class="ref"> (see December 28th, 1917, and December 14th, 1918)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-05-11">May 11</span></p>
<p>Peace signed in Berlin between Finland and Turkey.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-05-12">May 12</span></p>
<p>Military Treaty ("Waffenbund") signed between Germany and Austria-Hungary.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-05-14">May 14</span></p>
<p>Italian naval raid on Pola Harbour.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-05-15">May 15</span></p>
<p>German submarine bombards St. Kilda (Hebrides).</p>
<p>Agreement between Entente Powers, Japan, and China against German penetration in Far East announced.</p>
<p><span class="person">Dr. S. B. C. da Paes</span>, <span class="role">Portuguese Premier</span>, resigns<span class="ref"> (see 10th, and December 10th, 1017)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-05-16">May 16</span></p>
<p>Agreement signed at Peking between China and Japan for military co-operation against German and Bolshevik aggression<span class="ref"> (see 19th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Senhor J. T. de Souza Barboza</span>, appointed <span class="role">Portuguese Secretary of the Interior</span><span class="ref"> (see l0th, and December 22nd)</span>. The appointment of Premier lapsed between May 15th and December 23rd. During this period the functions of the office were performed by the Secretary of the Interior.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-05-17">May 17</span></p>
<p>Sinn Fein leaders arrested in Ireland and interned<span class="ref"> (see 25th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-05-18">May 18</span></p>
<p>First British retaliatory air raid on German towns. Cologne bombed by day.</p>
<p>Alexandropol (Georgia) occupied by Turkish forces.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-05-19">May 19</span></p>
<p>Last German night aeroplane raid on London in which casualties were inflicted; 19 killed and 177 wounded<span class="ref"> (see May 7th, July 7th, and October 19th, 1917, and August 5th, 1918)</span>. There were altogether nineteen aeroplane raids on London during which bombs were dropped, and one air reconnaissance during which no bombs were dropped.</p>
<p>German air raid on British camps and hospitals at Etaples; heavy casualties.</p>
<p>Agreement signed between China and Japan for naval co-operation<span class="ref"> (see 16th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-05-23">May 23</span></p>
<p>Costa Rica declares war on Germany<span class="ref"> (see September 21st, 1917)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-05-24">May 24</span></p>
<p>Kirkuk (Mesopotamia) evacuated by the British forces<span class="ref"> (see 7th, and October 25th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">General F. C. Poole</span> lands at Murmansk to organise the North Russia Expeditionary Force<span class="ref"> (see June 4th, 8th and 23rd)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-05-25">May 25</span></p>
<p>British Government publish account of Irish-German plots<span class="ref"> (see 17th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-05-26">May 26</span></p>
<p>Trans-Caucasian Federal Government<span class="ref"> (see September 20th, 1917, and April 22nd, 1918)</span>, dissolved. Georgia declares independence and forms a National Government. Armenian National Council assume charge of Armenian affairs<span class="ref"> (see June 8th)</span>. Tatar National Council proclaim establishment of a "Republic of Azerbaijan."</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-05-27">May 27</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the Aisne, 1918</span> ("Third Battle of the Aisne"), begins<span class="ref"> (see June 6th)</span>.</p>
<p>Craonne again taken by German forces<span class="ref"> (see Max 4th, 1917, and October 12th, 1918)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-05-29">May 29</span></p>
<p>Soissons again taken by German forces<span class="ref"> (see 27th, and August 2nd)</span>.</p>
<p>Peace Treaty signed at Vienna between Austria-Hungary and Finland.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-05-30">May 30</span></p>
<p>Fère-en-Tardenois taken by German forces (sec 27th, and July 28th).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-05-31">May 31</span></p>
<p>German forces reach the Marne. Château-Thierry and Dormans captured<span class="ref"> (see July 21st)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the Skra di Legen</span> (Macedonia).</p>
<p><span class="person">Samsam es Sultaneh</span>, <span class="role">Persian Prime Minister</span>, resigns<span class="ref"> (see 3rd, and June 20th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">M. G. Cooreman</span> succeeds <span class="person">Baron de Broqueville</span> as <span class="role">Belgian Prime Minister</span> (<span class="person">Baron de Broqueville</span> was appointed in 1911)<span class="ref"> (see November 21st)</span>. <span class="person">Baron de Broqueville</span> and <span class="person">M. Cooreman</span> presided over the Cabinet without the title of Prime Minister<span class="ref"> (see November 21st)</span>.</p>


</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-06-03">June 3</span></p>
<p>British, French, and Italian Governments make declarations supporting national aspirations of Poles, Czecho-Slovaks, and Yugo-Slavs<span class="ref"> (see February 20th, June 29th, August 13th, September 25th, and November 16th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-06-04">June 4</span></p>
<p>British Marines land at Pechenga (North Russia)<span class="ref"> (see May 24th)</span>.</p>
<p>The Don Cossacks declare independence.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-06-05">June 5</span></p>
<p>British Independent Air Force in France constituted under tactical command of <span class="person">Major-General Sir H. M. Trenchard</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-06-06">June 6</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the Aisne, 1918</span>, ends<span class="ref"> (see May 27th)</span>.</p>
<p>Dutch hospital ship "<span class="vessel">Koningen Regentes</span>" sunk by mine or torpedo.</p>
<p><span class="person">General Guillaumat</span>, Allied Commander-in-Chief, Salonika, recalled to Paris<span class="ref"> (see 15th and 18th, and December 22nd, 1917)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-06-07">June 7</span></p>
<p>British force lands at Kem (North Russia)<span class="ref"> (see May 24th)</span>.</p>
<p>Omsk (Siberia) occupied by Czecho-Slovak forces<span class="ref"> (see November 18th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-06-08">June 8</span></p>
<p>German Expeditionary Force to the Caucasus lands at Poti (Georgia).</p>
<p><span class="polity">Russian Bolshevik Government</span> order Entente forces in North Russia to leave the country<span class="ref"> (see 30th, and May 24th)</span>.</p>
<p>Georgian Government and Armenian National Council sign peace treaties with Turkey<span class="ref"> (see May 6th and 26th)</span>.</p>
<p>Georgian Government sign peace treaty with Germany<span class="ref"> (see May 6th and 26th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-06-09">June 9</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the Matz</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see 14th)</span>.</p>
<p>First sitting of Anglo-German Conference at The Hague on prisoners of war.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-06-10">June 10</span></p>
<p>Naval action off Premuda Island (Adriatic). Austrian battleship "<span class="vessel">Szent Istvan</span>" sunk by Italian motor launch.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-06-12">June 12</span></p>
<p>Tiflis (Georgia) occupied by a German force<span class="ref"> (see 8th, and December 27th)</span>.</p>
<p>Kurdamir (East Caucasus) occupied by Turkish forces.</p>
<p>Armistice concluded at Kiev between the whole State of The Ukraine and Russian Bolshevik Republic<span class="ref"> (see May 4th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-06-14">June 14</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the Matz</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see 9th)</span>.</p>
<p>Tabriz (North Persia) again occupied by Turkish forces<span class="ref"> (see January 30th, 1915)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-06-15">June 15</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the Piave</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see 24th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">General Guillaumat</span> appointed Governor of Paris<span class="ref"> (see 6th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-06-18">June 18</span></p>
<p>Russian battleship "<span class="vessel">Svobodnaya Rossiya</span>" destroyed in Black Sea to avoid surrender to the Germans<span class="ref"> (see May 4th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">General Franchet d'Esperey</span> appointed Commander-in-Chief Allied Forces, Salonika<span class="ref"> (see 6th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">M. Radoslavov</span>, <span class="role">Bulgarian Premier</span>, resigns (date of appointment July 20th, 1913). <span class="person">M. Malinov</span> appointed <span class="role" content="Bulgarian Premier">Premier</span> and <span class="role" content="Bulgarian Foreign Minister">Foreign Minister</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-06-20">June 20</span></p>
<p><span class="person">Samsam es Sultaneh</span> reappointed <span class="role">Persian Prime Minister</span><span class="ref"> (see May 31st and August 3rd)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-06-21">June 21</span></p>
<p><span class="person">Dr. Ernst Ritter von Seidler</span>, <span class="role">Austrian Premier</span>, resigns<span class="ref"> (see June 23rd, 1917)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-06-23">June 23</span></p>
<p>British Expeditionary Forces "<span class="vessel">Syren</span>" and "<span class="vessel">Elope</span>" join the North Russian Expeditionary Force at Murmansk<span class="ref"> (see 4th, May 24th and July 26th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-06-24">June 24</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the Piave</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see 15th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-06-27">June 27</span></p>
<p>British hospital ship "<span class="vessel">Llandovery Castle</span>" sunk by submarine off Irish coast.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-06-29">June 29</span></p>
<p>United States Government announce their view that all branches of the Slav races should be completely freed from German and Austrian rule<span class="ref"> (see 3rd)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-06-30">June 30</span></p>
<p>First contingent of United States troops arrive in Italy<span class="ref"> (see November 3rd and 4th, 1917)</span>.</p>
<p>Murman Railway from Murmansk to Soroki seized by Allied forces (29th/30th)<span class="ref"> (see 23rd)</span>.</p>
<p>Murman Soviet (Sovdep) decide to support the Entente against the Bolshevik Government<span class="ref"> (see 8th, and July 7th and November 20th)</span>.</p>
<p>Treaty signed between the Czecho-Slovaks and Italy, by which Italy recognises Czecho-Slovak Council and their jurisdiction over nationals.</p>

</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-07-01">July 1</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Affair of Nyamakura</span> (East Africa) (lst/3rd). Near Quelimane (Portuguese East Africa). This was the most southerly point reached by <span class="person">Colonel von Lettow-Vorbeck</span>'s force.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-07-03">July 3</span></p>
<p><span class="person">Sultan Mohammed V</span> of Turkey dies. <span class="person">Mohammed VI</span> succeeds to the throne<span class="ref"> (see November 14th, 1914)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-07-04">July 4</span></p>
<p>Siberian Council declare Independence<span class="ref"> (see 6th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-07-06">July 6</span></p>
<p>French and Italian forces begin offensive in Albania<span class="ref"> (see 10th and 22nd)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="role">German Ambassador at Moscow</span> (<span class="person">Count Mirbach</span>) murdered<span class="ref"> (see April 9th)</span>.</p>
<p>Declaration of Siberian Independence cancelled<span class="ref"> (see 4th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-07-07">July 7</span></p>
<p>Agreement signed between France, Great Britain, United States of America, and Murman Sovdep concerning Allied expedition to Murman Coast<span class="ref"> (see June 30th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-07-09">July 9</span></p>
<p><span class="person">Admiral von Hintze</span> succeds <span class="person">Herr von Kuhlmann</span> as <span class="role">German Foreign Minister</span><span class="ref"> (see August 5th, 1917, and October 4th, 1918)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-07-10">July 10</span></p>
<p>Berat (Albania) taken by Italian forces<span class="ref"> (see 6th, and February 17th, 1916)</span>.</p>
<p>New Government formed at Vladivostok under <span class="person">General Horvat</span><span class="ref"> (see August 24th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-07-12">July 12</span></p>
<p>Haiti declares war on Germany<span class="ref"> (see June 16th, 1917)</span>.</p>
<p>Japanese battleship "<span class="vessel">Kawachi</span>" destroyed by internal explosion.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-07-13">July 13</span></p>
<p>Irkutsk (Siberia) occupied by Czecho-Slovak forces<span class="ref"> (see October 14th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-07-14">July 14</span></p>
<p>Kazan (East Russia) captured by Czecho-Slovak forces.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-07-15">July 15</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Fourth Battle of Champagne</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see 18th, and April 17th, 1917)</span>.</p>
<p>British Government protest against "Sand and Gravel Agreement" between Germany and The Netherlands<span class="ref"> (see May 2nd)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-07-16">July 16</span></p>
<p><span class="person">Field-Marhal Conrad von Hötzendorff</span>, Commander-in-Chief, Austro- Hungarian Armies, relieved of his command.</p>
<p>Ex-<span class="role" content="Tsar of Russia">Tsar</span> <span class="person">Nicholas II</span>, ex-Tsaritsa, and family murdered at Ekaterinburg<span class="ref"> (see March 15th, 1917)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-07-18">July 18</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Fourth Battle of Champagne</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see 15th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Second Battle of the Marne</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see August 7th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Sir L. Worthington-Evans</span> succeeds <span class="person">Lord Robert Cecil</span> as <span class="role">British Minister for Blockade</span><span class="ref"> (see February 23rd, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-07-19">July 19</span></p>
<p>Honduras declares war on Germany<span class="ref"> (see May 17th, 1917)</span>.</p>
<p>British operations in Trans-Caspia begin<span class="ref"> (see August 26th)</span>.</p>
<p>United States cruiser "<span class="vessel">San Diego</span>" sunk by mine off Fire Island (Atlantic coast).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-07-20">July 20</span></p>
<p>German forces retreat across the Marne<span class="ref"> (see 18th)</span>.</p>
<p>Last attempt to attack the British Isles with aeroplanes (unsuccessful)<span class="ref"> (see December 21st, 1914, and August 5th, 1918)</span>. There were altogether 59 aeroplane raids against the British Isles during which bombs were dropped. There were also 11 reconnaissance flights over parts of Great Britain or in the vicinity of the coast when no bombs were dropped.</p>
<p>British defence of Resht (North-West Persia).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-07-21">July 21</span></p>
<p>Château-Thierry retaken by Allied forces<span class="ref"> (see 18th, 20th, and May 31st)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-07-22">July 22</span></p>
<p>Allied offensive in Albania checked<span class="ref"> (see 6th, 10th, and August 22nd)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-07-23">July 23</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Soissonais and Ourcq</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see August 2nd)</span>. British dates.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-07-26">July 26</span></p>
<p>Bulk of French Expeditionary Force troops join the North Russia Expeditionary Force at Murmansk<span class="ref"> (see June 23rd)</span>.</p>
<p><i>Coup d'etat</i> in Baku: Bolshevik Government replaced by Central Caspian Dictatorship.</p>
<p>British Government declare to <span class="person">M. Petrov</span> that they have no intention of infringing the territorial integrity of Russia<span class="ref"> (see August 6th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-07-28">July 28</span></p>
<p>Fère-en-Tardenois retaken by Allied forces<span class="ref"> (see May 30th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-07-30">July 30</span></p>
<p><span class="person">Field-Marshal von Eichhorn</span>, commanding German Army in The Ukraine, assassinated in Kiev<span class="ref"> (see April 29th)</span>.</p>


</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-08-01">August 1</span></p>
<p>Allied Expeditionary Force attack and capture the defences of Archangel<span class="ref"> (see 2nd)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-08-02">August 2</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Soissonais and Ourcq</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see July 23rd)</span>.</p>
<p>Soissons retaken by Allied forces<span class="ref"> (see May 29th)</span>.</p>
<p>Pro-Entente revolution in Archangel. Entente forces enter the town<span class="ref"> (see 1st)</span>.</p>
<p>Japanese Government decide to land troops at Vladivostok<span class="ref"> (see 11th, and April 5th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-08-03">August 3</span></p>
<p>British troops land at Vladivostok<span class="ref"> (see 2nd, and April 5th)</span>.</p>
<p>British ambulance transport "<span class="vessel">Warilda</span>" sunk by submarine.</p>
<p><span class="person">Samsam es Sultaneh</span>, <span class="role">Persian Prime Minister</span>, resigns<span class="ref"> (see 7th, and June 20th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-08-04">August 4</span></p>
<p>British force arrives at Baku (Caspian Sea)<span class="ref"> (see 26th, and July 19th)</span>.</p>
<p>Bolshevik Committee at Enzeli arrested by British military authorities.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-08-05">August 5</span></p>
<p>Last attempt to attack England with airships (unsuccessful - "<span class="notation">L.-70</span>" destroyed)<span class="ref"> (see January 19th, 1015, and April 12th and July 20th, 1918)</span>. There were altogether 51 airship raids against the British Isles during which bombs were dropped. There were also 8 attempted raids which either did not reach the coast, or which, for some other reason, failed in action. There were also 59 aeroplane attacks in which bombs were dropped<span class="ref"> (see July 20th)</span>, and 11 aeroplane reconnaissances. Total number of air raids in which, bombs were dropped was 110.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-08-06">August 6</span></p>
<p>British Government issue Declaration to Russian peoples, stating that they have no intention of interfering in Russian politics<span class="ref"> (see July 26th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">General Foch</span> created Marshal of France.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-08-07">August 7</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Second Battle of the Marne</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see July 18th)</span>.</p>
<p>French cruiser "<span class="vessel">Dupetit Thouars</span>" sunk by submarine in the Atlantic.</p>
<p><span class="person">Vossuq ed Douleh</span> appointed <span class="role">Persian Prime Minister</span><span class="ref"> (see 3rd, and May 29th, 1917)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-08-08">August 8</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Amiens</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see 11th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Montdidier</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see 15th)</span>.</p>
<p>British Government inform Finnish Government that they are in no way hostile to Finnish aspirations on the Murmau Coast and in Karelia.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-08-10">August 10</span></p>
<p>Montdidier retaken by French forces<span class="ref"> (see 8th, and March 27th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Mushaver ul Mamalek</span>, <span class="role">Persian Foreign Minister</span>, resigns<span class="ref"> (see 11th, and January 19th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-08-11">August 11</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Amiens</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see 8th)</span>.</p>
<p>German airship "<span class="notation">L.-53</span>" destroyed off Frisian coast. (Last German airship to be destroyed.)</p>
<p>First Japanese contingents arrive at Vladivostok<span class="ref"> (see 2nd and 24th, and September 5th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Mushaver ul Mamalek</span> reappointed <span class="role">Persian Foreign Minister</span><span class="ref"> (see 10th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-08-13">August 13</span></p>
<p>The Czecho-Slovaks declare War on Germany.</p>
<p>British Government recognise the Czecho-Slovaks as an Allied nation<span class="ref"> (see June 3rd and September 3rd)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Admiral von Capelle</span>, <span class="role">German Minister of Marine</span>, resigns<span class="ref"> (see 15th, and March 15th, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-08-15">August 15</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Montdidier</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see 8th)</span>.</p>
<p>Last bombardment of Paris by German long-range gun<span class="ref"> (see March 23rd)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Action of Bairam Ali</span> (Trans-Caspia): Trans-Caspian Government defeated by Bolshevik forces.</p>
<p><span class="person">Vice-Admiral von Behnke</span> appointed <span class="role">German Minister of Marine</span><span class="ref"> (see 13th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-08-17">August 17</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Second Battle of Noyon</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see 29th)</span>.</p>
<p>Slovene National Council meet at Ljubljana (Laibach) November 2nd).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-08-18">August 18</span></p>
<p>Merv (Trans Caspia) taken by Bolshevik forces<span class="ref"> (see November 1st)</span>. Approximate date.</p>
<p>British advance in Flanders begins: Action of Outtersteene Ridge.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-08-19">August 19</span></p>
<p>Merville retaken by British forces<span class="ref"> (see April 11th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-08-21">August 21</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battles of the Somme, 1918</span>, begin with the Battle of Albert, 1918 (21st/23rd)<span class="ref"> (see September 3rd)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-08-22">August 22</span></p>
<p>Albert recaptured by British forces<span class="ref"> (see 21st, and March 26th)</span>.</p>
<p>Austrian forces begin counter-offensive in Albania<span class="ref"> (see July 6th and 22nd)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-08-24">August 24</span></p>
<p><i>Coup d'etat</i> by <span class="person">General Horvat</span> at Vladivostok<span class="ref"> (see July 10th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Dukhovskaya</span> (Eastern Siberia) (23rd/24th). <span class="polity" content="Russian Bolshevik Government">Bolsheviki</span> decisively defeated by Allied forces: Japanese, with one British battalion.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-08-26">August 26</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battles of Arras, 1918</span>, begin with <span class="op">Battle of the Scarpe, 1918</span><span class="ref"> (see 30th, March 28th and September 3rd)</span>.</p>
<p>Berat (Albania) retaken by Austrian forces<span class="ref"> (see 22nd, and July 10th and October 1st)</span>.</p>
<p>Defence of Baku (Caspian Sea) against Turkish attack begins<span class="ref"> (see 4th, July 19th and September 15th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-08-27">August 27</span></p>
<p>Roye recaptured by British forces<span class="ref"> (see March 26th)</span>.</p>
<p>British force occupies Krasnovodsk on Caspian Sea.</p>
<p>German and <span class="polity" content="Russian Bolshevik Government">Russian Bolshevik</span> Governments conclude complementary treaty of peace<span class="ref"> (see March 3rd)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-08-28">August 28</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Affair near Kaakhka</span> (Trans-Caspia).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-08-29">August 29</span></p>
<p>Bapaume retaken by British forces<span class="ref"> (see March 24th)</span>.</p>
<p>Noyon retaken by French forces<span class="ref"> (see March 25th)</span>. <span class="op">Second Battle of Noyon</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see 17th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-08-30">August 30</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the Scarpe, 1918</span>, ends<span class="ref"> (see 26th)</span></p>
<p>Bailleul retaken by British forces<span class="ref"> (see April 15th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Lieut.-General Sir C. F. N. Macready</span>, <span class="role">Adjutant-General, Home Forces, Great Britain</span>, resigns<span class="ref"> (see February 22nd, 1916, and September 11th, 1918)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-08-31">August 31</span></p>
<p>German forces evacuate Mount Kemmel<span class="ref"> (see April 26th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Bapaume</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see March 24th and September 3rd)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Captain Cromie</span>, R.N., British Naval Attaché, murdered by Bolsheviki in British Embassy, Petrograd.</p>

</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-09-01">September 1</span></p>
<p>Peronne retaken by British forces<span class="ref"> (see March 24th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-09-02">September 2</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the Drocourt-Quéant Line</span> (2nd/3rd).</p>
<p>Italian contingent lands at Murmansk to join Allied Expeditionary Force<span class="ref"> (see July 26th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-09-03">September 3</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battles of the Somme, 1918</span>, end<span class="ref"> (see August 21st)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battles of Arras, 1918</span>, end<span class="ref"> (see August 26th)</span>.</p>
<p>Lens occupied by British forces<span class="ref"> (see October 4th, 1914)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Bapaume</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see August 31st)</span>.</p>
<p>United States Government recognises the Czecho-Slovaks as possessing a <i>de facto</i> Government<span class="ref"> (see August 13th and October 21st)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-09-04">September 4</span></p>
<p>Obozerskaya (North Russia) occupied by Allied forces<span class="ref"> (see August 2nd)</span>.</p>
<p>United States contingent lands at Murmansk to join Allied Expeditionary Force<span class="ref"> (see 2nd)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Hsu-Shih-Chang</span> elected <span class="role">President of China</span><span class="ref"> (see October 11th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-09-05">September 5</span></p>
<p>Khabarovsk (Eastern Siberia) taken by Japanese forces<span class="ref"> (see 18th, and August 11th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-09-11">September 11</span></p>
<p>Ukhtinskaya (Murman front) captured by Allied forces.</p>
<p><span class="person">Lieut.-General Sir G. M. W. Maedonogh</span> appointed <span class="role">Adjutant-General, Home Forces, Great Britain</span><span class="ref"> (see August 30th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-09-12">September 12</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of St. Mihiel</span> (12th/13th).</p>
<p><span class="op">Battles of the Hindenburg Line</span><span class="ref"> (see October 9th)</span> begin with <span class="op">Battle of Havrincourt</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Actions of Chamova</span> (Archangel front) begin<span class="ref"> (see 14th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-09-14">September 14</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Actions of Chamova</span> end<span class="ref"> (see 12th)</span>.</p>
<p>British evacuation of Baku begins<span class="ref"> (see 15th, and August 26th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-09-15">September 15</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the Dobropolje</span> (Macedonia) begins<span class="ref"> (see 16th)</span>. Called by the Serbs "Battle of the Moglenitza."</p>
<p>Baku finally evacuated by the British forces (night 14th/15th)<span class="ref"> (see August 26th and November 17th)</span>.</p>
<p>Austrian Government send Note to <span class="person">President Wilson</span> suggesting an "unofficial" peace conference<span class="ref"> (see 16th, and January 12th, 1917)</span>.</p>
<p>German Government make definite peace offer to Belgium<span class="ref"> (see January 10th and 12th, 1917)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-09-16">September 16</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the Dobropolje</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see 15th)</span>.</p>
<p>Last German aeroplane raid on Paris<span class="ref"> (see August 30th, 1914)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">President Wilson</span> replies to the Austrian Note rejecting suggestion for a peace conference<span class="ref"> (see 15th, and October 4th)</span>.</p>
<p>H.M.S. "<span class="vessel">Glatton</span>" sunk by explosion in Dover harbour.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-09-18">September 18</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Epéhy</span>.</p>
<p>Blagovyeschensk (Siberia) occupied by Japanese forces<span class="ref"> (see 5th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Monastir-Doiran</span><span class="ref"> (see 24th)</span>, including <span class="op">Battle of Doiran, 1918</span>, begins<span class="ref"> (see 19th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-09-19">September 19</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battles of Megiddo</span> (Sharon and Nablus) (Palestine) begin<span class="ref"> (see 23rd and 25th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Doiran, 1918</span>, ends<span class="ref"> (see 18th and 22nd)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-09-20">September 20</span></p>
<p>Nazareth and Beisan (Palestine) occupied by British cavalry<span class="ref"> (see 19th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-09-22">September 22</span></p>
<p>Doiran occupied by British forces<span class="ref"> (see 19th, and December 11th, 1915)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-09-23">September 23</span></p>
<p>Haifa, Acre, and Es Salt (Palestine) occupied by British forces<span class="ref"> (see 19th)</span>.</p>
<p>Prilep (South Serbia) taken by French forces<span class="ref"> (see November 16th, 1915)</span>.</p>
<p>Ma'an (on Hejaz Railway) evacuated by the Turkish garrison<span class="ref"> (see 29th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-09-24">September 24</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Monastir-Doiran</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see 18th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-09-25">September 25</span></p>
<p>Ishtip<span class="ref"> (see October 19th, 1915)</span> and Veles<span class="ref"> (see October 21st, 1915)</span> retaken by Serbian forces.</p>
<p>British cavalry cut Hejaz railway at Amman.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battles of Megiddo</span> end<span class="ref"> (see 19th)</span>.</p>
<p>Yugo-Slav State recognised as independent by Italy<span class="ref"> (see June 3rd and October 5th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-09-26">September 26</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Champagne and Argonne</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see October 15th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-09-27">September 27</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the Canal du Nord</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see October 1st)</span>.</p>
<p>Bulgarian Government ask Entente Powers for an armistice<span class="ref"> (see 30th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-09-28">September 28</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the Flanders Ridges</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see October 10th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Ypres, 1918</span>, begins<span class="ref"> (see November 10th, 1917, and October 2nd, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p>Messines retaken by British forces<span class="ref"> (see April 10th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Baron Goto</span>, <span class="role">Japanese Minister for Foreign Affairs</span>, resigns<span class="ref"> (see 29th, and April 22nd)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-09-29">September 29</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the St. Quentin Canal</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see October 2nd)</span>.</p>
<p>Passchendaele retaken by Allied forces<span class="ref"> (see 28th, and April 16th)</span>.</p>
<p>Dixmude retaken by Belgian forces<span class="ref"> (see November 10th, 1014)</span>.</p>
<p>Turkish garrison of Ma'an surrenders near Amman (Palestine)<span class="ref"> (see 23rd)</span>.</p>
<p>German force in East Africa recrosses the Rovuma and again enters German territory<span class="ref"> (see November 25th, 1917, and November 1st 1918)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-09-29">September 29</span></p>
<p><span class="person">Takashi Hara</span> succeeds <span class="person" content="Marshal-Count Masakata Terauchi">Count Terauchi</span> as <span class="role">Japanese Prime Minister</span><span class="ref"> (see October 9th, 1916)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Count Yasuya Uchida</span> appointed <span class="role">Japanese Minister for Foreign Affairs</span><span class="ref"> (see 28th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Lieut.-General Kenichi Oshima</span>, <span class="role">Japanese Minister for War</span>, resigns<span class="ref"> (see 30th, and March 30th, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-09-30">September 30</span></p>
<p>Armistice between Bulgaria and Entente Powers signed<span class="ref"> (see 27th)</span>.</p>
<p>Hostilities between Bulgaria and Entente Powers cease at 12 noon.</p>
<p>Canadian contingent lands at Archangel to join Allied Expeditionary Force<span class="ref"> (see August 2nd)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Count Hertling</span>, <span class="role">German Imperial Chancellor</span>, resigns<span class="ref"> (see October 30th, 1917, and October 4th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Lieut.-General Giichi Tanaka</span> appointed <span class="role">Japanese Minister for War</span><span class="ref"> (see 29th)</span>.</p>


</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-10-01">October 1</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the Canal du Nord</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see September 27th)</span>.</p>
<p>St. Quentin retaken by French forces<span class="ref"> (see September 27th)</span>.</p>
<p>Berat (Albania) retaken by Italian forces<span class="ref"> (see August 20th)</span>.</p>
<p>Damascus taken by British and Arab forces.</p>
<p>Allies establish net and mine barrage across Straits of Otranto.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-10-02">October 2</span></p>

<p><span class="op">Battle of Ypres, 1918</span>, ends<span class="ref"> (see September 28th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the St. Quentin Canal</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see September 29th)</span>.</p>
<p>Durazzo bombarded by Italian and British warships<span class="ref"> (see 14th, and February 27th, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-10-03">October 3</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the Beaurevoir Line</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see 5th)</span>.</p>
<p>Armentières retaken by British forces<span class="ref"> (see April 11th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Action near Pyavozero Lake</span> (Murman front).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-10-04">October 4</span></p>
<p><span class="person" content="Prince Max">Prince Max of Baden</span> appointed <span class="role">German Imperial Chancellor</span>, and succeeds <span class="person">Admiral von Hintze</span> as <span class="role" content="German Foreign Minister">Foreign Minister</span><span class="ref"> (see September 30th, July 9th, and November 9th)</span>.</p>
<p>German and Austro-Hungarian Governments send Notes to <span class="person">President Wilson</span> proposing an armistice<span class="ref"> (see 8th and 18th)</span>. The German note was received by <span class="person">President Wilson</span> on October 6th and the Austrian on October 7th.</p>
<p>Austro-Hungarian Government send Note to <span class="person">President Wilson</span> proposing an armistice<span class="ref"> (see 27th, and September 16th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">King Ferdinand of Bulgaria</span> abdicates in favour of his son <span class="person">Prince Boris</span><span class="ref"> (see September 30th and November 1st)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">General Ironside</span> takes over command of Allied forces at Archangel.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-10-05">October 5</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the Beaurevoir Line</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see 3rd)</span>.</p>
<p>Vranje retaken by Serbian forces<span class="ref"> (see October 15th, 1915)</span>.</p>
<p>Yugo-Slav delegates meet at Agram and decide on the formation of a United National Council<span class="ref"> (see 29th, and September 25th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-10-06">October 6</span></p>
<p>Sidon (Syria) occupied by British forces.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-10-07">October 7</span></p>
<p>Beirut (Syria) occupied by French forces</p>
<p>Elbasan (Albania) taken by Italian forces<span class="ref"> (see February 2nd, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-10-08">October 8</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Cambrai, 1918</span>, begins<span class="ref"> (see 9th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">President Wilson</span> replies to Note of German Government, and demands evacuation of occupied territories as first condition of armistice<span class="ref"> (see 4th and 12th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-10-09">October 9</span></p>
<p>Cambrai City captured by British forces<span class="ref"> (see August 26th, 1914)</span>.</p>
<p>End of <span class="op" content="Battle of Cambrai, 1918">Battle of Cambrai</span><span class="ref"> (see 8th)</span> brings <span class="op">Battles of the Hindenburg Line</span> to a close<span class="ref"> (see September 12th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Major-General Scheuch</span> succeeds <span class="person">Major-General von Stein</span> as <span class="role">German Minister for War</span><span class="ref"> (see October 30th, 1916, and December 17th, 1918)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-10-10">October 10</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the Flanders Ridges</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see September 28th)</span>.</p>
<p>Irish mail boat "<span class="vessel">Leinster</span>" sunk by submarine.</p>
<p>Pristina (Serbia) retaken by French forces<span class="ref"> (see November 23rd, 1915)</span></p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-10-11">October 11</span></p>
<p>Prizren (Serbia) retaken by French forces<span class="ref"> (see December 1st, 1915)</span>.</p>
<p>Nish (Serbia) reoccupied by Allied forces<span class="ref"> (see November 5th, 1915)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Feng-Kuo-Chang</span>, <span class="role">President of China</span>, retires<span class="ref"> (see July 6th, 1917, and September 4th, 1918)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-10-12">October 12</span></p>
<p>Craonne again captured by French forces<span class="ref"> (see May 27th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Action of Dushak</span> (Trans-Caspia).</p>
<p>German Government reply to <span class="person">President Wilson</span>'s Note and accept conditions<span class="ref"> (see 8th and 14th)</span>.</p>
<p>British Government recognise the Polish National Army as autonomous, allied and co-belligerent.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-10-13">October 13</span></p>
<p>Laon and La Fère retaken by French forces<span class="ref"> (see August 30th, 1014)</span>.</p>
<p>Tripoli (Syria) occupied by Allied forces. Izzet Pasha succeeds Talaat Pasha as Turkish Grand Vizier<span class="ref"> (see February 4th, 1917)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-10-14">October 14</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Courtrai</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see 19th)</span>.</p>
<p>Roulers recaptured by Allied forces<span class="ref"> (see October 18th, 1914)</span>.</p>
<p>Durazzo<span class="ref"> (see 2nd)</span>, Novi Bazar<span class="ref"> (see November 20th, 1915)</span>, and Ipek<span class="ref"> (see December 6th, 1915)</span> retaken by Italian forces.</p>
<p>British troops from Vladivostok reach Irkutsk (Siberia)<span class="ref"> (see 18th, and July 13th and August 3rd)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">President Wilson</span> replies to German Government, attaching further military conditions to the terms of armistice, and warning against further breaches of laws of war, and insists on dealing only with a democratic Government<span class="ref"> (see 12th and 20th)</span>.</p>
<p>Turkish Government Note to <span class="person">President Wilson</span> proposing an armistice delivered at Washington.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-10-15">October 15</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Champagne and Argonne</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see September 20th)</span>.</p>
<p>Menin captured by Allied forces<span class="ref"> (see October 9th, 1914)</span>.</p>
<p>Homs (Syria) occupied by British cavalry.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-10-16">October 16</span></p>
<p>Austrian Emperor issues manifesto proclaiming a Federal State on the principle of Nationality (excluding Hungary)<span class="ref"> (see 5th and 29th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-10-17">October 17</span></p>
<p>Ostend<span class="ref"> (see October 15th, 1914)</span>, Lille<span class="ref"> (see October 12th, 1914)</span>, and Douai<span class="ref"> (see August 20th, 1914)</span> retaken by Allied forces.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the Selle</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see 25th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-10-18">October 18</span></p>
<p>British troops from Vladivostok reach Omsk<span class="ref"> (see 14th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">President Wilson</span> replies to Austro-Hungarian Note of October 4th<span class="ref"> (see 27th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-10-19">October 19</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Courtrai</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see 14th)</span>.</p>
<p>Zeebrugge and Bruges reoccupied by Belgian forces<span class="ref"> (see October 12th and 14th, 1914)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-10-20">October 20</span></p>
<p>Belgian coast completely reoccupied by Allied forces<span class="ref"> (see October 15th, 1914)</span>.</p>
<p>German Government reply to <span class="person">President Wilson</span>'s Note accepting proposals contained therein<span class="ref"> (see 14th and 23rd)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-10-21">October 21</span></p>
<p>The Ban of Croatia refuses offer of Military Governor of Agram to suppress the Yugo-Slav National Council<span class="ref"> (see 5th and 29th)</span>.</p>
<p>The Czecho-Slovaks declare independence<span class="ref"> (see August 13th, September 3rd, and November 14th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-10-22">October 22</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Affair of Imad</span> (Aden).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-10-23">October 23</span></p>
<p>British advance on Mosul (Mesopotamia) begins<span class="ref"> (see November 4th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">President Wilson</span> replies to German Note of the 20th, and agrees to submit the matter to the Allied and Associated Governments<span class="ref"> (see 27th, and November 3rd)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-10-24">October 24</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Vittorio Veneto</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see November 4th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Dr. Wekerle</span>, <span class="role">Hungarian Premier</span>, resigns<span class="ref"> (see April 27th and November 1st)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-10-25">October 25</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the Selle</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see 17th)</span>.</p>
<p>Kirkuk (Mesopotamia) again taken by British forces<span class="ref"> (see May 24th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Count Andrassy</span> succeeds <span class="person">Baron Burian</span> as <span class="role">Austro-Hungarian Foreign Minister</span><span class="ref"> (see April 17th and November 1st)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-10-26">October 26</span></p>
<p>Aleppo (Syria) taken by British forces.</p>
<p>King of Montenegro issues manifesto in favour of a confederated Yugo-Slavia with autonomous States<span class="ref"> (see 29th, and November 7th and 23rd)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-10-27">October 27</span></p>
<p>Austrian Government ask Italy for an armistice<span class="ref"> (see 4th, and November 3rd)</span>.</p>
<p>German Government acknowledges <span class="person">President Wilson</span>'s Note of October 23rd.</p>
<p>Austro-Hungarian Government submit further Note to <span class="person">President Wilson</span> asking for immediate armistice "without awaiting the result of other negotiations")<span class="ref"> (see 4th and 18th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">General von Ludendorff</span> resigns<span class="ref"> (see August 29th, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-10-28">October 28</span></p>
<p>Muslimiya Junction, north of Aleppo (Syria), occupied by British cavalry.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Sharqat</span> (Mesopotamia) begins<span class="ref"> (see 30th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-10-29">October 29</span></p>
<p>San Giovanni di Medua (Albania) occupied by Italian forces<span class="ref"> (see January 25th, 1916)</span>.</p>
<p>Yugo-Slav National Council at Agram repudiate Imperial policy and declare the independence of the Yugo-Slavs<span class="ref"> (see 5th, 21st, 26th, and November 7th and 23rd)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-10-30">October 30</span></p>
<p>Armistice between Turkey and Entente Powers signed at Mudros<span class="ref"> (see 31st)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Sharqat</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see 28th)</span>.</p>
<p>Turkish army on the Tigris surrenders.</p>
<p>Fiume surrendered to the Croats by the Hungarian authorities.</p>
<p>"National Council of Fiume" proclaim the independence of the city and announce desire for union with Italy<span class="ref"> (see November 5th)</span>.</p>
<p>Croation Congress (Sabor) unanimously adhere to Yugo-Slav declaration of independence<span class="ref"> (see 29th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-10-31">October 31</span></p>
<p>Hostilities between Entente and Turkey cease at 12 noon<span class="ref"> (see 30th)</span>.</p>
<p>Scutari (Albania) retaken by Italian forces<span class="ref"> (see January 23rd, 1916)</span>.</p>
<p>Revolutions in Vienna and Budapest<span class="ref"> (see November 1st, 12th and 16th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Count Tisza</span> assassinated in Vienna<span class="ref"> (see May 23rd, 1917)</span>.</p>
<p>Austrian Emperor makes over the Austro-Hungarian Fleet to the Yugo-Slav National Council<span class="ref"> (see 29th)</span>.</p>

</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-11-01">November 1</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Valenciennes</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see 2nd)</span>.</p>
<p>Belgrade retaken by Serbian forces<span class="ref"> (see October 9th, 1915, and December 9th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p>Merv retaken by British and Russian forces<span class="ref"> (see August 18th)</span>. Approximate date.</p>
<p>German force in East Africa enters Rhodesia and attacks Fife<span class="ref"> (see 9th, and September 29th)</span>.</p>
<p>Austrian battleship "<span class="vessel">Viribus Unitis</span>" sunk in Pola harbour.</p>
<p>"State of War" begins between The Ukraine and Poland<span class="ref"> (see 23rd)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">King Boris of Bulgaria</span> abdicates<span class="ref"> (see October 4th )</span>.</p>
<p>Independent Hungarian Government formed. <span class="person">Count Karolyi</span> appointed <span class="role" content="Hungarian Premier">Premier</span><span class="ref"> (see October 24th and 31st)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Baron von Flotow</span> succeeds <span class="person">Count Andrassy</span> (provisionally) as <span class="role">Austro-Hungarian Foreign Minister</span><span class="ref"> (see October 25th, and entry next above)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-11-02">November 2</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Valenciennes</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see 1st and 3rd)</span>.</p>
<p>Last British merchant vessels (S.S. "<span class="vessel">Surada</span>" and "<span class="vessel">Murcia</span>") sunk by submarine (in the Mediterranean).</p>
<p>Administration of Carniola taken over from the Austro-Hungarian authorities by Slovene leaders<span class="ref"> (see August 17th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-11-03">November 3</span></p>
<p>Valenciennes occupied by British forces<span class="ref"> (see 2nd, and August 25th, 1914)</span>.</p>
<p>Allied Governments agree to Germany's proposal for an armistice and peace on basis of <span class="person">President Wilson</span>'s proposals of January 8th<span class="ref"> (see 5th and October 23rd)</span>.</p>
<p>Armistice between Austria-Hungary and the Entente signed<span class="ref"> (see 4th, 15th, and October 27th)</span>.</p>
<p>Trieste occupied by Italian forces.</p>
<p>Mutiny breaks out in the German fleet at Kiel<span class="ref"> (see August 3rd, 1917)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-11-04">November 4</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the Sambre</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Second Battle of Guise</span> (4th/5th).</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Vittorio Veneto</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see October 24th)</span>.</p>
<p>Hostilities between Austria-Hungary and the Entente cease<span class="ref"> (see 3rd and 15th)</span>.</p>
<p>Antivari (Montenegro) occupied by Italian naval forces<span class="ref"> (see January 22nd, 1916)</span>.</p>
<p>Mosul occupied by British forces<span class="ref"> (see October 23rd)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-11-05">November 5</span></p>
<p><span class="person">Marshal Foch</span> placed in supreme strategical direction of all forces operating against Germany on all fronts<span class="ref"> (see April 14th)</span>.</p>
<p>Fiume occupied by Italian naval forces<span class="ref"> (see 18th, and October 30th)</span>.</p>
<p>H.M.S. "<span class="vessel">Campania</span>" sunk by collision in the Firth of Forth.</p>
<p><span class="person">President Wilson</span> sends final Note to the German Government with Allies' acceptance of armistice proposals<span class="ref"> (see 3rd and 8th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-11-06">November 6</span></p>
<p>Rethel taken by French forces.</p>
<p>Sedan taken by United States forces<span class="ref"> (see August 29th, 1914)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">King Peter of Serbia</span> re-enters Belgrade<span class="ref"> (see 1st, and January 17th, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-11-07">November 7</span></p>
<p>Bavaria proclaimed a Republic.</p>
<p>Yugo-Slav conference at Geneva decide to form a joint Yugo-Slav-Serbian Government to control military and foreign affairs<span class="ref"> (see 23rd, and October 29th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-11-08">November 8</span></p>
<p>German armistice delegates reach Allied General Headquarters<span class="ref"> (see 11th, and October 23rd)</span>.</p>
<p>Maubeuge retaken by British forces<span class="ref"> (see September 7th, 1914)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">M. Marghiloman</span>, <span class="role">Rumanian Premier</span>, and <span class="person" content="M. Constantino Arian">M. Arian</span>, <span class="role">Rumanian Foreign Minister</span>, resign<span class="ref"> (see March 21st, and December 1st)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-11-09">November 9</span></p>
<p>Alexandretta (Syria) occupied by Entente naval forces.</p>
<p>Kasama (Rhodesia) taken by <span class="person">Colonel von Lettow-Vorbeck</span>'s force<span class="ref"> (see 1st and 13th)</span>.</p>
<p>H.M.S. "<span class="vessel">Britannia</span>" sunk by submarine in the Atlantic (last warship so lost).</p>
<p>Revolution breaks out in Berlin.</p>
<p><span class="role">German Imperial Chancellor</span> (<span class="person">Prince Max</span>) announces that <span class="person">the Kaiser</span> has decided to abdicate. <span class="person">Prince Max</span> becomes Regent. <span class="person">Herr Ebert</span> becomes <span class="role" content="German Imperial Chancellor">Imperial Chancellor</span><span class="ref"> (see 10th, 28th, and October 4th)</span>.</p>
<p>Joint Declaration by British and French Governments regarding future of Syria and Mesopotamia.</p>
<p>Czech forces at Ekaterinenburg proclaim national independence.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-11-10">November 10</span></p>
<p>Mézières retaken by French forces<span class="ref"> (see August 27th, 1914)</span>.</p>
<p>Ghent reoccupied by Belgian forces<span class="ref"> (see October 12th, 1914)</span>.</p>
<p>Allied forces cross the Danube at Ruschuk and enter Rumania.</p>
<p><span class="person">The Kaiser</span> crosses the frontier into Holland<span class="ref"> (see 9th and 28th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">King of Rumania</span> announces that the Rumanian nation have taken up arms again on the side of the Allies<span class="ref"> (see December 6th, 1917)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-11-11">November 11</span></p>
<p>Mons retaken by British forces<span class="ref"> (see August 24th, 1914)</span>.</p>
<p>Armistice concluded between the Allied and Associated Powers and Germany. Signed in <span class="person">Marshal Foch</span>'s special train at Rethondes Station in the Forest of Compiègne. Hostilities on the Western front cease at 11 a.m.<span class="ref"> (see 8th, and December 14th)</span>.</p>
<p>British Government recognise Latvian Provisional Government as independent<span class="ref"> (see January 12th)</span>.</p>
<p>New National Government formed in Estonia<span class="ref"> (see 16th, and January 13th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-11-12">November 12</span></p>
<p><span class="person">Emperor of Austria</span> abdicates<span class="ref"> (see October 31st)</span>.</p>
<p>Allied fleet passes through the Dardanelles<span class="ref"> (see 13th, and October 30th)</span>.</p>
<p>German-Austrian Republic proclaimed.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-11-13">November 13</span></p>
<p>Allied fleet arrives at Constantinople<span class="ref"> (see 12th and 21st)</span>.</p>
<p>German force in East Africa reaches the Chambezi River (Rhodesia). (News of armistice received)<span class="ref"> (see 9th, 14th and 25th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-11-14">November 14</span></p>
<p>Hostilities in East Africa cease. Professor Masaryk elected First President of the Czecho-Slovak Republic<span class="ref"> (see October 21st)</span>.</p>
<p>H.M.S. "<span class="vessel">Cochrane</span>" wrecked at entrance to Liverpool.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-11-15">November 15</span></p>
<p>German cruiser "<span class="vessel">Königsberg</span>" with German naval delegates, enters Firth of Forth to arrange surrender of the German fleet<span class="ref"> (see 20th and 21st)</span>.</p>
<p>Hungarian Government<span class="ref"> (see 1st)</span> concludes separate armistice with General Officer Commanding Allied Army (General Henry), at Belgrade<span class="ref"> (see 3rd)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">General Petlyura</span> commences revolt against The Ukraine Government<span class="ref"> (see December 11th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-11-16">November 16</span></p>
<p>Allied Armies begin march into Germany.</p>
<p>Polish Government (<span class="person">M. Pilsudski</span>) issue declaration proclaiming Poland an Independent and Sovereign State<span class="ref"> (see June 3rd)</span>.</p>
<p>New National Government in Estonia order general mobilisation<span class="ref"> (see 11th)</span>.</p>
<p>Hungary declares Independence<span class="ref"> (see 1st, and October 31st)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-11-17">November 17</span></p>
<p>Mulhouse again occupied by French forces<span class="ref"> (see August 25th, 1914)</span>.</p>
<p>Baku again occupied by British forces<span class="ref"> (see September 15th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">M. Moraczewski</span> appointed <span class="role">Polish Prime Minister</span><span class="ref"> (see 16th)</span>.</p>
<p>Yugo-Slav National Council at Agram protest against the Italian occupation of Fiume<span class="ref"> (see 5th and 18th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-11-18">November 18</span></p>
<p>Last German troops recross French frontier<span class="ref"> (see August 2nd, 1914)</span>.</p>
<p>Brussels reoccupied by Belgian forces<span class="ref"> (see 21st, and August 20th, 1914)</span>.</p>
<p>Italian troops reinforce naval detachment in Fiume<span class="ref"> (see 5th and 17th)</span>.</p>
<p>Counter-revolutionary <i>coup d'etat</i> at Omsk. Russian <span class="person">Admiral Kolchak</span> proclaimed "<span class="role">Dictator of all Russia</span>."</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-11-19">November 19</span></p>
<p>Metz occupied by French forces.</p>
<p>Antwerp reoccupied by Belgian forces<span class="ref"> (see October 10th, 1914)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">General Pétain</span> created Marshal of France<span class="ref"> (see May 15th, 1917)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-11-20">November 20</span></p>
<p>Luxembourg frontier crossed by United States forces<span class="ref"> (see August 2nd, 1914)</span>.</p>
<p>First contingent of German submarines surrender to the British Navy at Harwich<span class="ref"> (see 15th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">General Marushevski</span> appointed <span class="role" content="Russian Commander-in-Chief">Governor-General and Commander-in-Chief of Russian forces in North Russia (Archangel)</span><span class="ref"> (see June 30th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-11-21">November 21</span></p>
<p>German High Seas Fleet arrives at Rosyth, en route for internment in Scapa Flow<span class="ref"> (see 15th and 20th)</span>.</p>
<p>Belgian Government reinstated at Brussels<span class="ref"> (see 18th, and August 17th, 1914)</span>.</p>
<p>Namur occupied by British forces<span class="ref"> (see August 25th, 1914)</span>.</p>
<p>French troops land in Constantinople<span class="ref"> (see 13th)</span>.</p>
<p>Greek, Serbian, and Rumanian Governments issue circular memorandum announcing their decision to strengthen the union between the three countries by all available means.</p>
<p><span class="person" content="L. Delacroix">M. L. Delacroix</span> succeeds <span class="person">M. Cooreman</span> as <span class="role">Belgian Prime Minister</span><span class="ref"> (see May 31st)</span> and <span class="person">M. Masson</span> succeeds Lieut.-General de Ceuninck as Minister for War<span class="ref"> (see August 4th, 1917)</span>. <span class="person" content="L. Delacroix">M. Delacroix</span> was the first Minister to hold the title of Prime Minister.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-11-23">November 23</span></p>
<p>Lemberg captured by Polish forces<span class="ref"> (see 1st)</span>.</p>
<p>Yugo-Slav National Council vote for union with Serbia and formation of a common State with Serbia and Montenegro<span class="ref"> (see 7th, 29th, October 29th and December 4th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-11-24">November 24</span></p>
<p>British and United States troops reach German frontier<span class="ref"> (see December 1st)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-11-25">November 25</span></p>
<p>Strasbourg occupied by French forces.</p>
<p>German forces in East Africa surrender to Allied forces at Abercorn (Rhodesia)<span class="ref"> (see 13th and 14th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-11-26">November 26</span></p>
<p>Last German troops recross Belgian frontier<span class="ref"> (see August 4th, 1914)</span>.</p>
<p>French troops cross German frontier.</p>
<p>Allied fleet arrives at Sevastopol and takes over remainder of the Russian Black Sea Fleet from the Germans<span class="ref"> (see 13th, and May 1st)</span>.</p>
<p>United States force enters Fiume<span class="ref"> (see 17th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-11-28">November 28</span></p>
<p><span class="person">Kaiser Wilhelm II</span> signs abdication<span class="ref"> (see 9th and 10th)</span>.</p>
<p>Narva (Estonia) captured by Bolshevik forces<span class="ref"> (see March 4th)</span>.</p>
<p>The General Congress of The Bukovina decide in favour of complete union with Rumania<span class="ref"> (see December 7th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-11-29">November 29</span></p>
<p>Montenegrin National Assembly (Skupshtina) meet at Podgoritsa and vote for union with Serbia<span class="ref"> (see 23rd)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-11-30">November 30</span></p>
<p>Rumanian Government re-established at Bukharest<span class="ref"> (see December 1st, 1916)</span>.</p>

</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-12-01">December 1</span></p>
<p>British and United States troops cross the German frontier<span class="ref"> (see November 24th)</span>. Trèves occupied by United States troops.</p>
<p><span class="person">General Coanda</span> appointed <span class="role">Rumanian Premier</span> and <span class="role" content="Rumanian Foreign Minister">Foreign Minister</span><span class="ref"> (see 12th, and November 8th)</span>.</p>
<p>National Assembly of the Rumanians of Transylvania, the Banat and other districts of Hungary, assembled at Alba-Julia (Transylvania), decree their union with Rumania<span class="ref"> (see 7th, 10th, and 27th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-12-03">December 3</span></p>
<p>Last Bulgarian troops evacuate the Dobrudja<span class="ref"> (see September 2nd, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-12-04">December 4</span></p>
<p>H.M.S. "<span class="vessel">Cassandra</span>" sunk by mine in the Baltic (night 4th/5th).</p>
<p>Demobilisation of the British Army begins.</p>
<p>Yugo-Slav National Council at Agram proclaim the union of all Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes in one State<span class="ref"> (see November 23rd and 29th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-12-06">December 6</span></p>
<p>Cologne entered by British troops<span class="ref"> (see 12th, and November 24th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-12-07">December 7</span></p>
<p>Deputation from the National Council of The Bukovina arrives at Jassy to inform Rumanian Government that National Council has voted for union with Rumania<span class="ref"> (see 1st, 10th, and November 28th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-12-08">December 8</span></p>
<p>Coblenz occupied by United States troops<span class="ref"> (see 1st)</span>.</p>
<p>Naval action in the Caspian between British and Bolshevik vessels.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-12-09">December 9</span></p>
<p>Lahej (Southern Arabia) reoccupied by British forces<span class="ref"> (see July 4th, 1915)</span>.</p>
<p>Serbian Government reinstated at Belgrade<span class="ref"> (see May 7th, 1916, and November 1st and 6th, 1918)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-12-10">December 10</span></p>
<p>The Bessarabian National Council abrogate the stipulations for local autonomy and declare the unconditional union of Bessarabia with Rumania<span class="ref"> (see 1st, and April 9th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-12-11">December 11</span></p>
<p>Odessa occupied by Petlyura's Ukrainian revolutionary forces<span class="ref"> (see 20th, March 13th, and November 15th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">General Mannerheim</span> elected <span class="role">Regent of Finland</span><span class="ref"> (see December 6th, 1917)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-12-12">December 12</span></p>
<p>British troops cross the Rhine at Cologne<span class="ref"> (see 6th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">General Coanda</span>, <span class="role">Rumanian Premier</span> and <span class="role" content="Rumanian Foreign Minister">Foreign Minister</span>, resigns<span class="ref"> (see 1st and 14th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-12-13">December 13</span></p>
<p>Hodeida (Southern Arabia) taken by British forces.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-12-14">December 14</span></p>
<p>Armistice on the Western Front prolonged to January 17th, 1919<span class="ref"> (see November 11th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">M. Bratianu</span> appointed <span class="role">Rumanian Premier</span> and <span class="role" content="Rumanian Foreign Minister">Foreign Minister</span><span class="ref"> (see 12th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Dr. da Silva Paes</span>, <span class="role">Portuguese President</span>, assassinated<span class="ref"> (see 16th, and May 9th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-12-15">December 15</span></p>
<p>Poland severs diplomatic relations with Germany<span class="ref"> (see November 16th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-12-16">December 16</span></p>
<p><span class="person">Field-Marshal Mackensen</span> and his forces surrender to the Hungarians near Budapest.</p>
<p>Last German troops leave Finland<span class="ref"> (see April 3rd)</span>.</p>
<p>First meeting of "Imperial Conference" of Soldiers and Workmen in Berlin.</p>
<p><span class="person">Senhor Antunes</span> appointed <span class="role" content="Portuguese President">Acting Portuguese President</span><span class="ref"> (see 14th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-12-17">December 17</span></p>
<p><span class="person">Major-General Scheuch</span>, <span class="role">German Minister for War</span>, resigns<span class="ref"> (see October 9th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-12-20">December 20</span></p>
<p>Kiev occupied by Petlyura's Ukrainian revolutionary forces<span class="ref"> (see 11th, and March 2nd)</span>.</p>
<p>French troops land at Odessa<span class="ref"> (see 11th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">M. Pasich</span>, <span class="role">Premier of Serbia</span>, resigns. (Appointed in 1912)<span class="ref"> (see 29th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-12-22">December 22</span></p>
<p><span class="person">Senhor J. T. de Sousa Barboza</span>, <span class="role">Portuguese Secretary of the Interior</span>, resigns<span class="ref"> (see 23rd, and May 16th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-12-23">December 23</span></p>
<p><span class="person">Senhor J. T. de Sousa Barboza</span> appointed <span class="role">Portuguese Premier</span> and <span class="role" content="Portuguese Minister of Interior">Minister of Interior</span><span class="ref"> (see 22nd)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-12-24">December 24</span></p>
<p>Perm (East Russia) taken by Kolehak's forces<span class="ref"> (see November 18th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-12-26">December 26</span></p>
<p>Formation of West Ukraine Bepublic announced<span class="ref"> (see November 20th, 1917)</span>.</p>
<p>Dorpat (Estonia) evacuated by the German forces<span class="ref"> (see February 24th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-12-27">December 27</span></p>
<p>Batum (Georgia) occupied by British forces<span class="ref"> (see April 15th)</span>. This force subsequently occupied the whole of Georgia, with headquarters at Tiflis.</p>
<p><span class="person">King of Rumania</span> issues Proclamation annexing the Rumanian provinces of Austria-Hungary<span class="ref"> (see 1st)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-12-29">December 29</span></p>
<p><span class="person">M. Stoyan Protich</span> appointed <span class="role" content="Premier of Serbia">Prime Minister of the United Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes</span><span class="ref"> (see 4th and 20th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-12-30">December 30</span></p>
<p>Kadish (North Russia) taken by Allied forces.</p>
<p>Birsk (East Russia) taken by <span class="person" content="Admiral Kolchak">Kolchak</span>'s forces<span class="ref"> (see 24th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1918-12-31">December 31</span></p>
<p>Ufa and Sterlitamak (East Russia) taken by Bolshevik forces.</p>
</div>

</body>
</html>
