<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Principal Events 1914-15</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="events.css"/>
</head>
	
<body>

<p class="note">This work derives from <em>Principle Events 1914-1918</em>, compiled by The Historical Section of the Committee of Imperial Defence, and originally published by H.M. Stationery Office, in 1922; as part of the <em>History of the Great War</em>. It was prepared from the OCR text of the PDF copy held by the Internet Archive (<a href="https://archive.org/search?query=external-identifier%3A%22urn%3Aoclc%3Arecord%3A1050840522%22">urn:oclc:record:1050840522</a>).</p>
<p class="note">Only Part I of the book - the general chronological list - is reproduced in this work. Parts II and III give different presentations of entries in Part I. An ongoing effort will introduce semantic mark-up, with a view to being able to derive the presentation in Parts II and III (and more) from the chronological list.</p>
<p><a href="#1914">1914</a>, <a href="#1915">1915</a>, <a href="events-1916.xhtml#1916">1916</a>, <a href="events-1917.xhtml#1917">1917</a>, <a href="events-1918.xhtml#1918">1918</a></p>

<h2>Principal Events 1914-1918</h2>
<hr class="chap"/>

<h2 id="1914">1914</h2>

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-06-28">June 28</span></p>
<p><span class="person">The Archduke Franz Ferdinand</span> assassinated at Sarajevo.</p>
</div>

<!-- July 1914 -->

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-07-05">July 5</span></p>
<p><span class="person">The Kaiser</span> receives at Potsdam special envoy from Austrian Emperor and promises "the full support of Germany" in the event of Austrian action against Serbia. He consults his military and naval advisers before leaving for a cruise in northern waters.</p>
</div>

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-07-14">July 14</span></p>
<p>Council of Austro-Hungarian Ministers finally determine on action against Serbia.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-07-19">July 19</span></p>
<p>Council of Austro-Hungarian Ministers approve of draft ultimatum to Serbia.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-07-23">July 23</span></p>
<p>Austro-Hungarian Government send ultimatum to Serbia<span class="ref"> (see 25th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-07-24">July 24</span></p>
<p>German Government submit note to Entente Governments approving Austrian ultimatum to Serbia<span class="ref"> (see 23rd)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="role" content="British Foreign Secretary">British Foreign Minister</span> (<span class="person">Sir E. Grey</span>) initiates proposals for an international conference in order to avert war<span class="ref"> (see 27th and 28th)</span>.</p>
<p>Belgian Government declare that, in the event of war, Belgium will uphold her neutrality "whatever the consequences"<span class="ref"> (see 31st)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-07-25">July 25</span></p>
<p>Serbian Government order Mobilisation<span class="ref"> (see 23rd)</span>.</p>
<p>Austria-Hungary severs diplomatic relations with Serbia. Austro-Hungarian Minister leaves Belgrade<span class="ref"> (see 26th)</span>.</p>
<p>Serbian Government transferred from Belgrade to Nish<span class="ref"> (see November 3rd, 1915)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-07-26">July 26</span></p>
<p>Austro-Hungarian Government order Partial Mobilisation as against Serbia<span class="ref"> (see 28th and 31st)</span>.</p>
<p>Montenegrin Government order Mobilisation<span class="ref"> (see August 5th)</span>.</p>
<p>British Admiralty countermand orders for dispersal of Fleets<span class="ref"> (see 28th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">The Kaiser</span> returns from the Baltic to Berlin<span class="ref"> (see 5th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-07-27">July 27</span></p>
<p>French and Italian Governments accept British proposals for an international conference<span class="ref"> (see 24th)</span>.</p>
<p>German High Seas Fleet recalled from Norway to war bases.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-07-28">July 28</span></p>
<p>Austria-Hungary declares war on Serbia<span class="ref"> (see 25th and 26th)</span>.</p>
<p>German Government reject British proposals for an international conference<span class="ref"> (see 24th and 27th)</span>.</p>
<p>British Fleets ordered to war bases<span class="ref"> (see 26th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-07-29">July 29</span></p>
<p>Russian Government order Partial Mobilisation as against Austria.</p>
<p>(Evening) <span class="role">Russian Minister for War</span> orders General Mobilisation without the knowledge of <span class="person" content="Nicholas II">the Tsar</span><span class="ref"> (see 30th and 31st)</span>. Hostilities commence between Austria-Hungary and Serbia: Belgrade bombarded by Austrian artillery<span class="ref"> (see 25th, and December 2nd)</span>.</p>
<p>German Government make proposals to secure British neutrality<span class="ref"> (see 30th)</span>.</p>
<p>British Admiralty send "Warning Telegram" to the Fleets.</p>
<p>British War Office send out telegrams ordering "Precautionary Period" (2.10 p.m.).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-07-30">July 30</span></p>
<p><span class="person" content="Nicholas II">The Tsar</span> signs order at 4 p.m. for mobilisation of Russian army<span class="ref"> (see 29th and 31st)</span>.</p>
<p>British Government reject German proposals for British neutrality<span class="ref"> (see 29th)</span>.</p>
<p>Australian Government place Australian Navy at disposal of British Admiralty.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-07-31">July 31</span></p>
<p>Belgian Government order Mobilisation<span class="ref"> (see 24th)</span>.</p>
<p>Russian Government order General Mobilisation<span class="ref"> (see 29th and 30th)</span>.</p>
<p>Austro-Hungarian Government order General Mobilisation<span class="ref"> (see 26th and 28th)</span>.</p>
<p>German Government send ultimatum to Russia (presented at midnight, 31st-lst)<span class="ref"> (see August 1st)</span>.</p>
<p>State of "Kriegsgefahr" proclaimed in Germany<span class="ref"> (see August 1st)</span>.</p>
<p>Turkish Government order Mobilisation (to commence August 3rd)<span class="ref"> (see October 29th)</span>.</p>
<p>London Stock Exchange closed<span class="ref"> (see January 4th, 1915)</span>.</p>
</div>

<!--  August 1914 -->

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-08-01">August 1</span></p>
<p>British Government order Naval Mobilisation.</p>
<p>German Government order General Mobilisation and declare war on Russia<span class="ref"> (see July 31st)</span>.</p>
<p>Hostilities commence on Polish frontier.</p>
<p>French Government order General Mobilisation.</p>
</div>

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-08-02">August 2</span></p>
<p>German Government send ultimatum to Belgium demanding passage through Belgian territory<span class="ref"> (see 3rd, and July 24th)</span>.</p>
<p>German troops cross frontier of Luxembourg<span class="ref"> (see November 20th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p>Hostilities commence on French frontier.</p>
<p>Libau bombarded by German cruiser "<span class="vessel">Augsburg</span>"<span class="ref"> (see November 17th)</span>.</p>
<p>British Government guarantee naval protection of French coasts against German aggression by way of the North Sea or English Channel.</p>
<p>Moratorium proclaimed in Great Britain<span class="ref"> (see November 4)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">General von Moltke</span> (Chief of the Great General Staff since 1906) appointed Chief of the General Staff of the German Field Armies<span class="ref"> (see September 14th)</span>.</p>
</div>

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-08-03">August 3</span></p>
<p>Belgian Government refuse German demands<span class="ref"> (see 2nd and 4th)</span>.</p>
<p>British Government guarantee armed support to Belgium should Germany violate Belgian neutrality.</p>
<p>Germany declares war on France.</p>
<p>British Government order General Mobilisation.</p>
<p>British Government issue Proclamation authorising requisition of shipping.</p>
<p>Italy declares neutrality.</p>
<p><span class="person">The Grand Duke Nicholas</span> appointed Commander-in-Chief Russian armies<span class="ref"> (see 14th)</span>.</p>
</div>

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-08-04">August 4</span></p>
<p>British Government send ultimatum to Germany.</p>
<p>Great Britain declares war on Germany at 11 p.m. (midnight 4th-5th by Central European time).</p>
<p>Belgium severs diplomatic relations with Germany<span class="ref"> (see 2nd and 3rd)</span>.</p>
<p>Germany declares war on Belgium.</p>
<p>German troops cross Belgian frontier and attack Liége<span class="ref"> (see 3rd and 7th, and November 26th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p>Two German airships pass over Brussels by night (first hostile act in the air).</p>
<p>German warships "<span class="vessel">Goeben</span>" and "<span class="vessel">Breslau</span>" bombard Philippeville and Bona respectively<span class="ref"> (see 7th and 11th)</span>.</p>
<p>Secret Alliance between Germany and Turkey signed at Berlin.</p>
<p>British Grand Fleet constituted under <span class="person">Admiral Sir John Jellicoe</span><span class="ref"> (see November 29th and December 4th, 1916)</span>.</p>
<p>Staff of British Expeditionary Force appointed: — Commander-in-Chief: <span class="person" content="Sir John French">Field-Marshal Sir John French</span><span class="ref"> (see December 15th, 1915)</span>. Chief of General Staff: <span class="person" content="Archibald Murray">LieutGeneral Sir Archibald Murray</span><span class="ref"> (see January 24th. 1915)</span>. Adjutant-General: <span class="person">Lieut.-General Sir Nevil Macready</span><span class="ref"> (see February 21st, 1916)</span>. Quartermaster-General: <span class="person" content="Sir William Robertson">LieutGeneral Sir William Robertson</span><span class="ref"> (see January 24th, 1915)</span>.</p>
<p>British Government issue Proclamation specifying articles to be treated as contraband<span class="ref"> (see 20th, and September 21st)</span>.</p>
<p>German armed merchant cruiser "<span class="vessel">Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse</span>" leaves Bremen<span class="ref"> (see 26th)</span>.</p>
</div>

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-08-05">August 5</span></p>
<p>Montenegro declares war on Austria-Hungary<span class="ref"> (see July 26th)</span>.</p>
<p>Minelaying in the open sea commenced by the Germans (east of Southwold)<span class="ref"> (see October 3rd)</span>. German minelayer "<span class="vessel">Königin Luise</span>" sunk.</p>
<p>First meeting of British War Council<span class="ref"> (see May 14th, 1915)</span>. Formed to exercise the functions of the Committee of Imperial Defence, but with additional executive powers.</p>
</div>

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-08-06">August 6</span></p>
<p>Austria-Hungary declares war on Russia. (Declaration presented at St. Petersburg).</p>
<p>Serbia declares war on Germany<span class="ref"> (see July 28th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">"Battle of the Frontiers"</span> (General name covering all operations of the French armies up to the Battle of the Marne.) begins in France.</p>
<p><span class="person" content="Lord Kitchener">Field-Marshal Earl Kitchener</span> succeeds <span class="person">Mr. Asquith</span> as <span class="role">Secretary of State for War, Great Britain</span>. (<span class="person">Mr. Asquith</span> held the appointment from March 31st, 1914.) (See June 5th, 1916.)</p>
<p>H.M.S. "<span class="vessel">Amphion</span>" sunk by mine off Yarmouth.</p>
<p>Naval Convention between France and Great Britain concluded in London. French Admiral to command Allied Naval Forces in the Mediterranean. (See November 9th.)</p>
<p>Action between H.M.S. "<span class="vessel">Bristol</span>" and German cruiser "<span class="vessel">Karlsruhe</span>" in the West Indies<span class="ref"> (see November 4th)</span>.</p>
<p>German armed merchant cruiser "<span class="vessel">Prinz Eitel Friedrich</span>" leaves <span class="place">Tsingtau</span><span class="ref"> (see January 28th and April 8th, 1915)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Admiral von Spee</span>'s squadron ("<span class="vessel">Scharnhorst</span>" [flag], "<span class="vessel">Gneisenau</span>," "<span class="vessel">Nürnberg</span>." "<span class="vessel">Dresden</span>" and "<span class="vessel">Leipzig</span>" joined on October 12th and 14th respectively.) leaves Ponape (Caroline islands)<span class="ref"> (see September 22nd)</span>.</p>
</div>

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-08-07">August 7</span></p>
<p>City of Liége occupied by German forces<span class="ref"> (see 4th and 16th)</span>.</p>
<p>First units of British Expeditionary Force land in France<span class="ref"> (see 16th)</span>.</p>
<p>French troops cross the frontier of Alsace<span class="ref"> (see 2nd)</span>.</p>
<p>Action between H.M.S. "<span class="vessel">Gloucester</span>" and the "<span class="vessel">Goeben</span>" and "<span class="vessel">Breslau</span>" off the coast of Greece<span class="ref"> (see 4th and 11th)</span>.</p>
</div>

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-08-08">August 8</span></p>
<p>Montenegro severs diplomatic relations with Germany.</p>
<p>"State of War" commences between Montenegro and Germany<span class="ref"> (see 5th)</span>.</p>
<p>Mulhouse (Alsace) occupied by French forces<span class="ref"> (see 7th and 11th)</span>,</p>
<p>British forces cross frontier of Togoland and occupy Lome<span class="ref"> (see 13th and 26th)</span>.</p>
<p>Swiss Government order Mobilisation.</p>
<p>Hostilities commence in East Africa<span class="ref"> (see 15th)</span> . H.M.S. "<span class="vessel">Astraea</span>" bombards Dar es Salaam<span class="ref"> (see September 4th, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-08-09">August 9</span></p>
<p>British aerial cross-Channel patrol for the protection of transports instituted.</p>
<p>Belgian Government proposal for neutralisation of African free trade zone formulated<span class="ref"> (see 22nd)</span>.</p>
<p>H.M.S. "<span class="vessel">Birmingham</span>" sinks German submarine "<span class="notation" content="U15">U.-15</span>" in the North Sea. (First submarine destroyed.)</p>
</div>

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-08-10">August 10</span></p>
<p>British aerial coast patrol established.</p>
<p>France severs diplomatic relations with Austria-Hungary<span class="ref"> (see 12th)</span>.</p>
</div>

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-08-11">August 11</span></p>
<p>German warships "<span class="vessel">Goeben</span>" and "<span class="vessel">Breslau</span>" enter the Dardenelles<span class="ref"> (see 4th and 7th)</span>.</p>
<p>Mulhouse retaken by German forces<span class="ref"> (see 8th and 19th)</span>.</p>
<p>French Government issue first list of contraband<span class="ref"> (see 25th and November 6th)</span>.</p>
</div>

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-08-12">August 12</span></p>
<p>Great Britain and France declare war on Austria-Hungary<span class="ref"> (see 10th)</span>.</p>
<p>Austrian forces cross the Save and seize Shabatz<span class="ref"> (see 25th)</span>.</p>
</div>

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-08-13">August 13</span></p>
<p>Austrian forces cross River Drina and begin first invasion of Serbia<span class="ref"> (see 25th)</span>.</p>
<p>Four squadrons Royal Flying Corps fly from Dover to France. (First units to cross by air.)</p>
<p>Allied advance on Kamina (Togoland) from Lome begins<span class="ref"> (see 8th and 26th)</span>.</p>
</div>

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-08-14">August 14</span></p>
<p>Proclamation issued by Russian Commander-in-Chief (<span class="person">The Grand Duke Nicholas</span>) promising autonomy to Poland<span class="ref"> (see April 3rd, 1915)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battles of Morhange and Sarrebourg</span> begin<span class="ref"> (see 20th)</span>.</p>
</div>

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-08-15">August 15</span></p>
<p><span class="polity" content="Japan">Japanese Government</span> send ultimatum to Germany demanding evacuation of <span class="place">Tsingtau</span><span class="ref"> (see 23rd, and September 2nd)</span>.</p>
<p>German troops cross frontier of British East Africa and occupy Taveta<span class="ref"> (see 8th, November 2nd, and March 10th, 1916)</span>.</p>
<p>Junction of British and French squadrons effected at entrance to the Adriatic.</p>
</div>

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-08-16">August 16</span></p>
<p>Landing of original British Expeditionary Force (4 Divisions and 1 Cavalry Division) in France completed (announced August 18th)<span class="ref"> (see 7th)</span>.</p>
<p>Last forts of Liége captured by German forces (16th/17th)<span class="ref"> (see 4th and 7th)</span>.</p>
<p>Naval action in the Southern Adriatic: Austrian light cruiser "<span class="vessel">Zenta</span>" sunk by Allied squadron.</p>
</div>

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-08-17">August 17</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the Tser and the Jadar</span> (Serbia) begins<span class="ref"> (see 13th and 21st)</span>.</p>
<p>Belgian Government transferred from Brussels to Antwerp<span class="ref"> (see October 7th)</span>.</p>
</div>

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-08-18">August 18</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the Gette</span> (18th/19th).</p>
<p><span class="person">Vossuq ed Douleh</span>, <span class="role">Persian Foreign Minister</span>, resigns. (Appointed January 11th, 1913.) (See 19th, and August 29th, 1916.)</p>
</div>

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-08-19">August 19</span></p>
<p>Belgian Army retreats from the Gette on Antwerp.</p>
<p>Mulhouse again taken by French forces<span class="ref"> (see 11th and 25th)</span>.</p>
<p>First unit of Indian Expeditionary Force "C" (This unit, the 29th Punjabis, was the first to leave India for any theatre of war.) leaves India for East Africa<span class="ref"> (see September 1st)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Ala es Sultaneh</span>, <span class="role">Persian Prime Minister</span>, resigns (appointed January 11th, 1913) and is appointed Foreign Minister<span class="ref"> (see 18th, and February 20th, 1915)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Mustaufi ul Mamalek</span> appointed <span class="role">Persian Prime Minister</span><span class="ref"> (see March 14th, 1915)</span>.</p>
</div>

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-08-20">August 20</span></p>
<p>Brussels occupied by German forces<span class="ref"> (see November 18th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battles of Morhange and Sarrebourg</span> end<span class="ref"> (see 14th)</span>.</p>
<p>Longwy invested by German forces<span class="ref"> (see 26th)</span>.</p>
<p>Battle of Gawaiten-Gumbinnen (East Prussia) (19th/20th).</p>
<p>Death of <span class="person">Pope Pius X</span><span class="ref"> (see September 3rd)</span>.</p>
<p>First British Order in Council revising "Declaration of London" issued<span class="ref"> (see October 29th)</span>.</p>
</div>

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-08-21">August 21</span></p>
<p>German forces begin attack on Namur<span class="ref"> (see 25th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Charleroi</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see 24th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the Tser and the Jadar</span> ends. Austrian Armies in Serbia retreat<span class="ref"> (see 17th)</span>.</p>
<p>German forces from <span class="place">German South-West Africa</span> cross frontier of British South Africa<span class="ref"> (see September 19th)</span>.</p>
<p>British Government issue orders for the raising of the first New Army of six Divisions<span class="ref"> (see May 9th, 1915)</span>.</p>
</div>

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-08-22">August 22</span></p>
<p>Austria-Hungary declares war on Belgium<span class="ref"> (see 28th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the Ardennes</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see 24th)</span>.</p>
<p>German Government agree to Belgian proposal, made through Spanish Government, <i>re</i> African free trade zone<span class="ref"> (see 9th, and November 20th)</span>.</p>
</div>

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-08-23">August 23</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Mons</span><span class="ref"> (see 24th)</span>.</p>
<p>German airship "<span class="notation" content="Z8">Z.-8</span>" shot down in the Vosges.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Tannenberg</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see 31st)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">First Battle of Krasnik</span> (Poland) begins<span class="ref"> (see 25th)</span>.</p>
<p>Germany severs diplomatic relations with Japan<span class="ref"> (see 15th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="polity" content="Japan">Japan</span> declares war on Germany<span class="ref"> (see 15th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person" content="Charles Macpherson Dobell">General C. M. Dobell</span> appointed to command Allied land forces operating in the Cameroons.</p>
<p><span class="person" content="Paul von Hindenburg">General von Hindenburg</span> takes over command of German Eighth Army<span class="ref"> (see September 18th)</span>.</p>
</div>

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-08-24">August 24</span></p>
<p><span class="op" content="Retreat from Mons">British army retreats from Mons</span><span class="ref"> (see 23rd, and September 5th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Charleroi</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see 21st)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the Ardennes</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see 22nd)</span>.</p>
<p>Austria-Hungary severs diplomatic relations with Japan<span class="ref"> (see 25th)</span>.</p>
<p>First units of Indian Expeditionary Force "A" leave India for France (in first place for Egypt)<span class="ref"> (see September 26th)</span>.</p>
</div>

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-08-25">August 25</span></p>
<p>Namur captured by German forces<span class="ref"> (see 21st, and November 21st, 1918.)</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the Meuse</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see 28th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Malines</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see 27th)</span>.</p>
<p>Valenciennes taken by German forces<span class="ref"> (see November 3rd, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p>Maubeuge invested by German forces<span class="ref"> (see September 7th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the Mortagne</span> (Vosges) begins<span class="ref"> (see September 3rd)</span>.</p>
<p>Mulhouse again retaken by German forces<span class="ref"> (see 19th, and November 17th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p>First use of aircraft for patrol purposes (over retreating British forces in France).</p>
<p><span class="op">First Battle of Krasnik</span> (Poland) ends<span class="ref"> (see 23rd)</span>.</p>
<p>Shabatz<span class="ref"> (see 12th)</span> retaken by Serbian forces. Last Austrian forces recross the Drina<span class="ref"> (see 13th)</span>. End of First Austrian invasion of Serbia<span class="ref"> (see September 8th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="polity" content="Japan">Japan</span> severs diplomatic relations with Austria-Hungary<span class="ref"> (see 24th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="polity" content="Japan">Japan</span> declares "State of War" with Austria-Hungary.</p>
<p>Nigerian frontier of the Cameroons crossed by British forces. <span class="op">Affair of Tepe</span>. Chad frontier crossed by French forces.</p>
<p>French Government issue new decree defining contraband<span class="ref"> (see 11th, and November 6th)</span>.</p>
</div>

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-08-26">August 26</span></p>
<p>Louvain sacked by German troops.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Le Cateau</span>.</p>
<p>Noyon taken by German forces<span class="ref"> (see September 21st)</span>.</p>
<p>Longwy capitulates to German forces<span class="ref"> (see 20th)</span>.</p>
<p>Cambrai occupied by German forces<span class="ref"> (see November 20th, 1017, and October 9th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p>Douai occupied by German forces<span class="ref"> (see October 17th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">First Battle of Lemberg</span> (Galicia) begins<span class="ref"> (see 30th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Zamosc-Komarow</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see September 2nd)</span>.</p>
<p>Naval action off the Aaland Islands. German cruiser "<span class="vessel">Magdeburg</span>" destroyed by Russian squadron.</p>
<p>German forces in Togoland capitulate to the Allied forces<span class="ref"> (see 8th, 13th and 31st)</span>.</p>
<p>Action between H.M.S. "<span class="vessel">Highflyer</span>" and German armed merchant cruiser "<span class="vessel">Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse</span>" off the Rio de Oro: latter sunk<span class="ref"> (see August 4)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">General Galliéni</span> appointed <span class="role">Governor of Paris</span><span class="ref"> (see October 30th, 1915)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">M. Messimy</span>, <span class="role">French Minister for War</span> (Appointed June 14th, 1914), resigns<span class="ref"> (see 27th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">M. Delcassé</span> succeeds <span class="person">M. Doumerguef</span> (Appointed August 3rd, 1914) as French Foreign Minister.</p>
</div>

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-08-27">August 27</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Malines</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see 25th)</span>.</p>
<p>British Marines landed at Ostend, accompanied by R.N.A.S. unit.</p>
<p>Lille occupied by German cavalry<span class="ref"> (see September 5th)</span>.</p>
<p>Mezieres occupied by German forces<span class="ref"> (see November 10th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">M. Millerand</span> appointed <span class="role">French Minister for War</span><span class="ref"> (see 26th, and October 29th, 1915)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">First attack on Mora</span> (Cameroons)<span class="ref"> (see September 8th, 1915)</span>.</p>
</div>

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-08-28">August 28</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the Meuse</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see 25th)</span>.</p>
<p>Austro-Hungarian declaration of war received by Belgian Government<span class="ref"> (see 22nd)</span>.</p>
<p>Naval action off Heligoland (German light cruisers "<span class="vessel">Köln</span>," "<span class="vessel">Mainz</span>," and "<span class="vessel">Ariadne</span>" sunk by British squadron).</p>
</div>

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-08-29">August 29</span></p>
<p>Arras evacuated by the French forces<span class="ref"> (see September 30th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Guise</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see 30th)</span>.</p>
<p>Sedan taken by German forces<span class="ref"> (see November 6th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p>German airship "<span class="notation" content="Z5">Z.-5</span>" brought down by gunfire at Mlawa (Poland).</p>
</div>

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-08-30">August 30</span></p>
<p>Laon, La Fère, and Roye occupied by German forces<span class="ref"> (see March 17th, 1917, and October 13th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Guise</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see 29th, and November 4th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p>First German aeroplane raid on Paris<span class="ref"> (see September 16th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">First Battle of Lemberg</span> (Galicia) ends<span class="ref"> (see 26th, and September 3rd)</span>.</p>
<p>First attack on Garua (Cameroons)<span class="ref"> (see April 18th, 1915)</span>.</p>
<p>Samoa occupied by New Zealand Expeditionary Force.</p>
</div>

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-08-31">August 31</span></p>
<p>Amiens entered by German forces<span class="ref"> (see September 13th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Tannenberg</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see 23rd)</span>.</p>
<p>Franco-British Agreement defining provisional zones in Togoland concluded<span class="ref"> (see 26th, and December 27th, 1910)</span>.</p>
</div>

<!-- September 1914 -->

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-09-01">September 1</span></p>
<p><span class="person">Lord Kitchener</span> visits France to confer with British Commander-in-Chief.</p>
<p>Craonne taken by German forces<span class="ref"> (see May 4th, 1917)</span>.</p>
<p>Soissons taken by German forces<span class="ref"> (see 13th)</span>.</p>
<p>First unit of Indian Expeditionary Force "C" arrives at Mombasa<span class="ref"> (see August 19th and December 31st)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">General J. Stewart</span> takes over <span class="role" content="British Commander-in-Chief in East Africa">command of British forces in East Africa</span><span class="ref"> (see October 31st)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-09-02">September 2</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Zamosc-Komarow</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see August 26th)</span>.</p>
<p>Japanese forces land in Shantung to attack <span class="place">Tsingtau</span> (sea August 15th, September 23rd and November 7th).</p>
<p>French Government transferred from Paris to Bordeaux<span class="ref"> (see November 18th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-09-03">September 3</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the Mortagne</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see August 25th)</span>.</p>
<p>Lemberg captured by Russian forces<span class="ref"> (see August 30th, 1914, and June 22nd, 1915)</span>.</p>
<p>H.M.S. "<span class="vessel">Speedy</span>" sunk by mine the Humber.</p>
<p><span class="person">Benedict XV</span> elected Pope<span class="ref"> (see August 20th and November 5th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Prince William of Wied</span> leaves Albania<span class="ref"> (see October 4th)</span>.</p>
<p>French Government inform United States Government that they will observe "Declaration of London" subject to certain modifications.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-09-04">September 4</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the Grand Couronné</span> (Nancy) begins<span class="ref"> (see 12th)</span>.</p>
<p>German Government agree to observe "Declaration of London" if other belligerents conform thereto, and issue their list of contraband.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-09-05">September 5</span></p>
<p>End of <span class="op">Retreat from Mons</span><span class="ref"> (see August 24th, 1914, and November 11th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the Ourcq</span> begins.</p>
<p>German forces reach Claye, 10 miles from Paris (nearest point reached during war).</p>
<p>Reims taken by German forces<span class="ref"> (see 14th)</span>.</p>
<p>Lille evacuated by German forces<span class="ref"> (see August 27th and October 12th)</span>.</p>
<p>H.M.S. "<span class="vessel">Pathfinder</span>" sunk by submarine in North Sea (first British warship so destroyed).</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the Masurian Lakes</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see 15th)</span>.</p>
<p>German forces cross frontier of North Rhodesia. <span class="op">Defence of Abercorn</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see 9thh)</span>.</p>
<p>British, French, and Russian Governments sign "Pact of London." Decision not to make separate peace<span class="ref"> (see April 26th, October 19th, and November 30th, 1915)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-09-06">September 6</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the Marne</span> begins (French date)<span class="ref"> (see 9th and 10th)</span>.</p>
<p>Serbian passage the Save. Serbian operations in Syrmia begin<span class="ref"> (see 11th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Affair of Tsavo</span> (East Africa).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-09-07">September 7</span></p>
<p>Maubeuge capitulates to German forces<span class="ref"> (see August 25th, 1914, and November 8th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Tarnavka</span> (Galicia) begins<span class="ref"> (see 9th)</span>.</p>
<p>Naval operations off Duala (Cameroons) begin, in preparation for attack by Allied military forces<span class="ref"> (see 27th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-09-08">September 8</span></p>
<p>Austrian forces begin second invasion of Serbia<span class="ref"> (see August 25th and December 15th)</span>. <span class="op">Battle of the Drina</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see 17th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Second Battle of Lemberg</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see 11th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">General Sir John Maxwell</span> takes over command of British forces in Egypt<span class="ref"> (see March 19th, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-09-09">September 9</span></p>
<p>German retreat from the Marne begins<span class="ref"> (see 6th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Tarnavka</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see 7th)</span>.</p>
<p>Turkish Government announce abolition of "The Capitulations."</p>
<p><span class="op">Affairs near Karonga</span> (Nyassaland). First important fighting.</p>
<p><span class="op">Defence of Abercorn</span> (Rhodesia) ends. German force retreats<span class="ref"> (see 5th)</span> .</p>
<p>First units of Indian Expeditionary Force "A" arrive at Suez<span class="ref"> (see 19th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-09-10">September 10</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the Marne</span> ends (British date)<span class="ref"> (see 6th)</span>.</p>
<p class="added"><span class="op">Battle of the Ourcq</span> ends.</p>
<p>Semlin (Syrmia) occupied by Serbian forces<span class="ref"> (see 17th)</span>.</p>
<p>German light cruiser "<span class="vessel">Emden</span>" makes her first capture in the Indian Ocean (Greek collier "<span class="vessel">Pontoporos</span>")<span class="ref"> (see 22nd, and October 28th)</span>.</p>
<p>German and Austrian representatives expelled from Egypt<span class="ref"> (see November 1st)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-09-11">September 11</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Second Battle of Lemberg</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see 8th)</span>. Austrian forces in Galicia retreat<span class="ref"> (see October 3rd)</span>.</p>
<p>Serbian advance in Syrmia abandoned<span class="ref"> (see and 17th)</span>.</p>
<p>British Government issue orders the raising of the second New Army of six divisions<span class="ref"> (see August 21st September 13th)</span>.</p>
<p>Australian Expeditionary Force lands on Bismarck Archipelago (German Guinea).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-09-12">September 12</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the Grand Couronné</span> (Nancy) ends<span class="ref"> (see 4th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the Aisne, 1914</span>, begins<span class="ref"> (see 15th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Affair of Herbertshöhe</span> (German Guinea)<span class="ref"> (see 11th and 17th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-09-13">September 13</span></p>
<p>Soissons<span class="ref"> (see 1st, and January 8th, 1915)</span> and Amiens<span class="ref"> (see August 31st)</span> reoccupied by French forces.</p>
<p>British Government issue orders raising third New Army of six divisions<span class="ref"> (see llth)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-09-14">September 14</span></p>
<p>Reims evacuated by German forces<span class="ref"> (see 5th and 19th)</span>.</p>
<p>Action between British armed merchant cruiser "<span class="vessel">Carmania</span>" and German armed merchant cruiser "<span class="vessel">Cap Trafalgar</span>" in the South Atlantic: latter sunk.</p>
<p><span class="person">General von Moltke</span> resigns as Chief of the General Staff of the German Field Armies, and is succeeded by <span class="person" content="Erich von Falkenhayn">General Falkenhayn</span><span class="ref"> (see August 2nd, 1914, and August 20th, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-09-15">September 15</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the Aisne, 1914</span>, ends<span class="ref"> (see 12th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the Masurian Lakes</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see 5th)</span>.</p>
<p>Czernowitz (Bukovina) taken by Russian forces<span class="ref"> (see October 22nd)</span>.</p>
<p>Rebellion in South Africa begins<span class="ref"> (see December 1st and 28th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-09-17">September 17</span></p>
<p>German New Guinea and surrounding Colonies capitulate to Australian Expeditionary Force<span class="ref"> (see 21st, and October 11th)</span>.</p>
<p>Serbian forces in Syrmia withdrawn. Semlin evacuated<span class="ref"> (see 16th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the Drina</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see 8th)</span>.</p>
<p>British Naval Mission leaves Turkey.</p>
<p><span class="person">Admiral Souchon</span> (Imperial German navy) assumes control of Turkish navy.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-09-18">September 18</span></p>
<p><span class="person" content="Paul von Hindenburg">General Hindenburg</span> appointed Commander-in-Chief of German Armies in Eastern Theatre<span class="ref"> (see August 23rd and November 27th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-09-19">September 19</span></p>
<p>First units of Indian Expeditionary Force "A" leave Egypt for Marseilles<span class="ref"> (see 9th)</span>.</p>
<p>First bombardment of Reims Cathedral by German artillery<span class="ref"> (see 14th)</span>.</p>
<p>Cattaro bombarded by French squadron.</p>
<p>Lüderitzbucht (<span class="place">German South-West Africa</span>) occupied by South African forces. First German territory to be entered by Union troops.</p>
<p>British and French Governments guarantee to Belgium the integrity of her colonies.</p>
<p>Secret agreement for mutual support concluded between Russian and Rumanian Governments.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-09-20">September 20</span></p>
<p>H.M.S. "<span class="vessel">Pegasus</span>" sunk by German light cruiser "<span class="vessel">Königsberg</span>" at Zanzibar<span class="ref"> (see October 31st, 1914, and July 11th, 1915)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-09-21">September 21</span></p>
<p>Noyon retaken by French forces<span class="ref"> (see 25th, and August 26th)</span>.</p>
<p>Jaroslaw (Galicia) taken by Russian forces<span class="ref"> (see May 14th, 1915)</span>.</p>
<p>German armed forces in New Guinea surrender to the Australian Expeditionary Force<span class="ref"> (see 17th, and October 11th)</span>.</p>
<p>British Proclamation issued adding to list of contraband<span class="ref"> (see August 4th and December 23rd)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-09-22">September 22</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Picardy</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see 26th)</span>.</p>
<p>H.M.S. "<span class="vessel">Aboukir</span>," "<span class="vessel">Hogue</span>," and "<span class="vessel">Cressy</span>" sunk by German submarine "<span class="notation" content="U9">U.-9</span>."</p>
<p><span class="person" content="Admiral von Spee">Admiral Spee</span>'s squadron bombards Papeete in Tahiti (see, August 6th and November 1st).</p>
<p>German light cruiser "<span class="vessel">Emden</span>" bombards Madras<span class="ref"> (see 10th, and October 28th)</span>.</p>
<p>First British air raid on Germany (Düsseldorf and Cologne airship sheds attacked)<span class="ref"> (see October 8th)</span>.</p>
<p>First use of wireless telegraphy from aeroplane to artillery (by British Royal Flying Corps).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-09-23">September 23</span></p>
<p>British force joins Japanese army before <span class="place" content="Tsingtau">Tshigtau</span>. Force landed September 22nd; in action September 24th.<span class="ref"> (see 2nd, and November 7th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-09-24">September 24</span></p>
<p>Péronne taken by German forces<span class="ref"> (see March 18th, 1017)</span>.</p>
<p>Przemysl isolated by Russian forces. First siege begins<span class="ref"> (see October 9th)</span>.</p>
<p>Russian forces begin first Invasion of North Hungary<span class="ref"> (see October 8th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-09-25">September 25</span></p>
<p>Noyon retaken by German Eorces<span class="ref"> (see 21st, and March 18th, 1917)</span>.</p>
<p>Actions on the Niemen begin<span class="ref"> (see 29th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-09-26">September 26</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Picardy</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see 22nd)</span>.</p>
<p>Bapaume occupied by German Eorces<span class="ref"> (see March 17th, 1917)</span>.</p>
<p>First units of Indian Expeditionary Force "A" land at Marseilles<span class="ref"> (see 19th, and October 19th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-09-27">September 27</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Siege of Antwerp</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see October 10th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">First Battle of Artois</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see October 12th)</span>.</p>
<p>Duala (Cameroons) captured by Allied forces (26th/27th)<span class="ref"> (see 7th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-09-28">September 28</span></p>
<p>Malines taken by German forces. Distinctive markings on German aircraft first reported<span class="ref"> (see November 12th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person" content="Sir Arthur Arnold Barrett">Lieut.-General Sir A. Barrett</span> appointed Commander-designate of Indian Expeditionary Force "D" for Mesopotamia<span class="ref"> (see November 13th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-09-29">September 29</span></p>
<p>German offensive on the Niemen abandoned<span class="ref"> (see 25th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-09-30">September 30</span></p>
<p>Arras reoccupied by French forces<span class="ref"> (see August 29th)</span>.</p>
</div>

<!-- October 1914 -->

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-10-02">October 2</span></p>
<p>Termonde (Belgium) taken by German forces.</p>
<p>Indian Expeditionary Force "E" formed in Egypt from details of Indian Expeditionary Force "A"<span class="ref"> (see August 24th, 1914, and March 25th, 1915)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-10-03">October 3</span></p>
<p>Ypres occupied by German cavalry<span class="ref"> (see 13th)</span>.</p>
<p>British army begins to leave the Aisne and to move northwards<span class="ref"> (see 19th)</span>.</p>
<p>First units of British Royal Naval Division (Marine Brigade) arrive at Antwerp (3rd/4th).</p>
<p>First contingents of Canadian and Newfoundland Expeditionary Forces leave for England<span class="ref"> (see 15th)</span>.</p>
<p>Retreat of Austro-Hungarian forces in Galicia ends<span class="ref"> (see September 11th)</span>.</p>
<p>Maramaros-Sziget taken by Russian forces<span class="ref"> (see 7th)</span>.</p>
<p>Minelaying in the open sea (between the Goodwins and Ostend) commenced by British<span class="ref"> (see August 5th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-10-04">October 4</span></p>
<p>Lens and Bailleul occupied by German forces<span class="ref"> (see 14th, and September 3rd, 1918, and August 30th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p>Austro-Hungarian counter-offensive in Galicia begins<span class="ref"> (see 3rd)</span>.</p>
<p>Provisional Government under Essad Pasha set up in Albania at Durazzo<span class="ref"> (see February 24th, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-10-06">October 6</span></p>
<p>Units of British 7th Division disembark at Ostend and Zeebrugge to co-operate with Belgian army<span class="ref"> (see 12th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-10-07">October 7</span></p>
<p>Maramaros-Sziget retaken by Austrian forces<span class="ref"> (see 3rd)</span>.</p>
<p>Belgian Government transferred from Antwerp to Ostend<span class="ref"> (see August 17th and October 12th and 13th)</span>. Evacuation of Antwerp begun.</p>
<p>Japanese naval forces occupy Yap Island (Pacific).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-10-08">October 8</span></p>
<p><span class="person">General Foch</span> appointed to command Allied forces (less Belgians) defending the Flanders coast<span class="ref"> (see May 15th, 1917)</span>.</p>
<p>Second British air raid on Germany (Düsseldorf and Cologne airship sheds attacked)<span class="ref"> (see September 22nd)</span>.</p>
<p>First Russian invasion of North Hungary ends<span class="ref"> (see September 24th and November 15th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-10-09">October 9</span></p>
<p>Merville, Estaires, Armentières, and Hazebrouck taken by German forces<span class="ref"> (see 10th, 11th and 17th)</span>.</p>
<p>Menin occupied by German forces (Approximate date.)<span class="ref"> (see October 15th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p>Last forts of Antwerp taken by German forces<span class="ref"> (see 10th, and September 27th)</span>.</p>
<p>First German offensive against Warsaw. Battles of <span class="op" content="Battle of Warsaw">Warsaw</span> and <span class="op" content="Battle of Ivangorod">Ivangorod</span> begin<span class="ref"> (see 19th and 20th)</span>.</p>
<p>Przemysl relieved by advancing Austrian forces<span class="ref"> (see 4th)</span>. End of First siege<span class="ref"> (see September 24th and November 10th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-10-10">October 10</span></p>
<p>Antwerp capitulates to German forces<span class="ref"> (see 9th, and September 27th, 1914, and November 19th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p>Hazebrouck and Estaires captured by British forces<span class="ref"> (see 9th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of La Bassée</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see November 2nd)</span>.</p>
<p>Protocol signed by United States of America and Panama as to use of Panama Canal by ships of belligerent Powers.</p>
<p><span class="person">King Charles of Rumania</span> dies, and is succeeded by his son <span class="person">Ferdinand</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-10-11">October 11</span></p>
<p>Merville retaken by British forces<span class="ref"> (see 9th, and April 11th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p>Bussian cruiser "<span class="vessel">Pallada</span>" sunk by German submarine off Hangö.</p>
<p>German gunboat "<span class="vessel">Komet</span>" captured by H.M.A.S. "<span class="vessel">Nusa</span>" near Talassia (Neu Pommern). Last, act of hostilities in Australasian waters.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-10-12">October 12</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Messines, 1914</span>, begins<span class="ref"> (see November 2nd)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">First Battle of Artois</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see September 27th)</span>.</p>
<p>Ostend and Zeebrugge evacuated by Belgian forces<span class="ref"> (see 6th and 15th)</span>.</p>
<p>Lille capitulates to German forces<span class="ref"> (see September 5th, 1914, and October 17th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p>Ghent evacuated by Belgian forces and occupied by German forces<span class="ref"> (see November 10th, 1918)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-10-13">October 13</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Armentières</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see November 2nd)</span>.</p>
<p>Ypres reoccupied by Allied forces retreating from Ghent<span class="ref"> (see 3rd and 19th)</span>.</p>
<p>First appearance of a German submarine on the Southampton-Havre troop-transport route reported.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Chyrow</span> (Galicia) begins<span class="ref"> (see November 2nd)</span>.</p>
<p>Belgian Government set up at Havre<span class="ref"> (see 7th, and November 21st, 1918)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-10-14">October 14</span></p>
<p>Bailleul occupied by British forces<span class="ref"> (see 4th, and April 15th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p>Bruges occupied by German forces<span class="ref"> (see October 19th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p>Yabasi (Cameroons) captured by Allied forces.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-10-15">October 15</span></p>
<p>Belgian coast-line reached by German forces<span class="ref"> (see October 20th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p>Zeebrugge and Ostend occupied by German forces<span class="ref"> (see 12th, and October 17th and 19th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p>First units of Canadian and Newfoundland Expeditionary Forces land in England<span class="ref"> (see 3rd, and February 9th, 1915)</span>.</p>
<p>H.M.S. "<span class="vessel">Hawke</span>" sunk by German submarine in North Sea.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-10-16">October 16</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the Yser</span> begins (Belgian date)<span class="ref"> (see November 10th)</span>.</p>
<p>New Zealand Expeditionary Force leaves New Zealand for France<span class="ref"> (see December 1st)</span>.</p>
<p>Indian Expeditionary Force "B" leaves India for East Africa<span class="ref"> (see 31st)</span>.</p>
<p>First units of Indian Expeditionary Force "D" leave India for the Persian Gulf<span class="ref"> (see 23rd)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Marquis di San Giuliano</span>, <span class="role">Italian Foreign Minister</span> (appointed March 24th 1914), dies<span class="ref"> (see November 3rd)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-10-17">October 17</span></p>
<p>Armentières recaptured by Allied forces<span class="ref"> (see 9th, and April 11th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p>Action by H.M.S. "<span class="vessel">Undaunted</span>" and destroyers with four German destroyers off Butch coast; latter all sunk.</p>
<p>First British submarines ("<span class="notation" content="E1">E.-1</span>" and "<span class="notation" content="E9">E.-9</span>") enter the Baltic.</p>
<p>German submarines attempt raid on Scapa Flow<span class="ref"> (see 18th)</span>.</p>
<p>First units of Australian Imperial Force embark for France<span class="ref"> (see December 1st)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-10-18">October 18</span></p>
<p>First bombardment of Ostend by British warships<span class="ref"> (see 15th)</span>.</p>
<p>Roulers taken by Germarj forces<span class="ref"> (see October 14th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p>Grand Fleet withdraws from Scapa Flow to West of Scotland<span class="ref"> (see 17th, and November 3rd)</span>.</p>
<p>Japanese light cruiser "<span class="vessel">Takachiho</span>" sunk by German destroyer off <span class="place">Tsingtau</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-10-19">October 19</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battles of Ypres, 1914</span>, begin<span class="ref"> (see 31st, and November 22nd)</span>.</p>
<p>Transfer of British army from the Aisne to Flanders completed<span class="ref"> (see 3rd)</span>.</p>
<p>First Indian units reach the Flanders front<span class="ref"> (see September 26th, and November 10th, 1915)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Warsaw</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see 9th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-10-20">October 20</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Ivangorod</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see 9th)</span>.</p>
<p>First merchant vessel sunk by German submarine (British S.S. "<span class="vessel">Glitra</span>")<span class="ref"> (see February 19th and March 13th and 28th, 1915)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-10-21">October 21</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Langemarck, 1914</span> (Ypres) begins<span class="ref"> (see 24th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-10-22">October 22</span></p>
<p>Czernowitz (Bukovina) reoccupied by Austrian forces<span class="ref"> (see 28th, and September 15th)</span>.</p>
<p>United States Government issue Circular Note to belligerent Governments stating that they will insist on existing rules of International Law<span class="ref"> (see July 28th, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-10-23">October 23</span></p>
<p>Advanced troops of Indian Expeditionary Force "D" arrive at the Bahrein Islands (Persian Gulf)<span class="ref"> (see 16th, and November 6th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-10-24">October 24</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Langemarck, 1914</span> (Ypres), ends<span class="ref"> (see 21st)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-10-25">October 25</span></p>
<p><span class="person">General Sir C. Douglas</span>, <span class="role">Chief of the Imperial General Staff, Great Britain</span> (Appointed April 6, 1914), dies<span class="ref"> (see 26th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-10-26">October 26</span></p>
<p>German forces begin an unprovoked invasion of Angola (Portuguese West Africa)<span class="ref"> (see December 4th)</span>.</p>
<p>Edea (Cameroons) occupied by French forces.</p>
<p><span class="person">General Sir J. Wolfe Murray</span> appointed <span class="role">Chief of the Imperial General Staff, Great Britain</span><span class="ref"> (see 25th, and September 25th, 1915)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-10-27">October 27</span></p>
<p>H.M.S. "<span class="vessel">Audacious</span>" sunk by mine off coast of Donegal.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-10-28">October 28</span></p>
<p>Czernowitz (Bukovina) reoccupied by Russian forces<span class="ref"> (see 22nd, and February 17th, 1915)</span>.</p>
<p>German cruiser "<span class="vessel">Emden</span>" raids Penang Roads and sinks Russian cruiser "<span class="vessel">Zhemchug</span>"<span class="ref"> (see September 10th and November 9th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-10-29">October 29</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Gheluvelt</span> (Ypres) begins<span class="ref"> (see 31st)</span>.</p>
<p>Turkey commences hostilities against Russia<span class="ref"> (see July 31st, and November 2nd and 5th)</span> . Turkish warships bombard Odessa, Sevastopol, and Theodosia.</p>
<p>New British Order in Council revises list of contraband and modifies "Declaration of London" of 1909<span class="ref"> (see August 20th, 1914, and July 7th, 1916)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Prince Louis of Battenberg</span>, <span class="role">First Sea Lord, Great Britain</span> (Appointed December 9th, 1912.), resigns<span class="ref"> (see 30th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-10-30">October 30</span></p>
<p>Stanislau (Galicia) taken by Russian forces<span class="ref"> (see February 19th, 1915)</span>.</p>
<p>Serbian forces begin retreat from the line of the Drina<span class="ref"> (see November 30th)</span>.</p>
<p>Allied Governments present ultimatum to Turkey<span class="ref"> (see 29th)</span>.</p>
<p>Great Britain and France sever diplomatic relations with Turkey. British and French Ambassadors demand passports<span class="ref"> (see 31st, and November 5th)</span>.</p>
<p>Italian Cabinet resign. New Cabinet formed. <span class="person">Signor Salandra</span> remains <span class="role" content="Italian Premier">Premier</span> (previously appointed March 24th, 1914)<span class="ref"> (see May 13th, 1915)</span>.</p>
<p>British hospital ship "<span class="vessel">Rohilla</span>" wrecked off Whitby.</p>
<p><span class="person">Lord Fisher</span> appointed <span class="role">First Sea Lord, Great Britain</span><span class="ref"> (see 29th, and May 15th, 1915)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-10-31">October 31</span></p>
<p>Critical day of <span class="op">Battles of Ypres, 1914</span>: British line broken and restored<span class="ref"> (see 19th, and November 11th)</span>. <span class="op">Battle of Gheluvelt</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see 29th)</span>.</p>
<p>H.M.S. "<span class="vessel">Hermes</span>" sunk by German submarine in Straits of Dover.</p>
<p>British Government issue orders for hostilities to commence against Turkey<span class="ref"> (see 30th, and November 1st and 5th)</span>.</p>
<p>First units of Indian Expeditionary Force "B" arrive at Mombasa<span class="ref"> (see 16th, and December 31st)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person" content="General J. Stewart">General Stewart</span> succeeded in <span class="role" content="British Commander-in-Chief in East Africa">command of British forces in East Africa</span> by <span class="person">General Aitken</span><span class="ref"> (see September 1st and December 4th)</span>.</p>
<p>German light cruiser "<span class="vessel">Königsberg</span>" located in Rufiji River<span class="ref"> (see July 11, 1915)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Lord Kitchener</span> sends to Sherif of Mecca conditional guarantee of Arabian independence<span class="ref"> (see July 14th, 1915)</span>.</p>
</div>

<!-- November 1914 -->

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-11-01">November 1</span></p>
<p>Messines taken by German forces<span class="ref"> (see June 7th, 1917)</span>.</p>
<p>Great Britain and Turkey commence hostilities<span class="ref"> (see 5th, and October 30th and 31st)</span>.</p>
<p>Naval action off Coronel. H.M.S. "<span class="vessel">Good Hope</span>" and "<span class="vessel">Monmouth</span>" sunk by <span class="person">Admiral von Spee</span>'s Squadron<span class="ref"> (see September 22nd and December 8th)</span>.</p>
<p>Martial law proclaimed in Egypt<span class="ref"> (see September 10th and December 18th )</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-11-02">November 2</span></p>
<p>Battles of <span class="op" content="Battle of Messines, 1914">Messines</span> and <span class="op" content="Battle of Armentières">Armentières</span> end<span class="ref"> (see October 12th and 13th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of La Bassée</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see October 10th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Chyrow</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see October 13th)</span>.</p>
<p>Austrian cruiser "<span class="vessel">Kaiserin Elizabeth</span>" sunk in <span class="place" content="Tsingtau">Tsingtau harbour</span>.</p>
<p>First units of Indian Expeditionary Force "F" leave India for Egypt<span class="ref"> (see 16th)</span>.</p>
<p>Government of India announce immunity of the Mussulman Holy Places during hostilities with Turkey.</p>
<p>Russia declares war on Turkey<span class="ref"> (see October 29th)</span>.</p>
<p>"State of War" commences between Serbia and Turkey.</p>
<p>British Admiralty declare the North Sea a military zone.</p>
<p>British force begins <span class="op" content="Attack on Tanga">attack on <span class="place">Tanga</span></span> (<span class="place">German East Africa</span>)<span class="ref"> (see 5th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-11-03">November 3</span></p>
<p>First German naval raid British coast near Gorleston and Yarmouth.</p>
<p>Grand Fleet ordered back to Scapa Flow<span class="ref"> (see October 18th, 1914, and November 21st, 1918)</span> .</p>
<p>Northern frontier of <span class="place">German East Africa</span> first crossed by British troops. (<span class="op">Affair of Longido</span>.)<span class="ref"> (See August 15th.)</span></p>
<p>Allied squadrons bombard forts at entrance of the <span class="place">Dardanelles</span><span class="ref"> (see December 13th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Baron Sonnino</span> appointed <span class="role">Italian Foreign Minister</span><span class="ref"> (see October 16th and 30th, 1914, and May 13th, 1015)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-11-04">November 4</span></p>
<p>German cruiser "<span class="vessel">Karlsruhe</span>" sunk in the Atlantic by internal explosion<span class="ref"> (see August 6th)</span>.</p>
<p>German cruiser "<span class="vessel">Yorck</span>" sunk by mine off the German coast.</p>
<p>Russian forces cross frontier of Turkey-in-Asia and seize Azap.</p>
<p>Moratorium in Great Britain ends<span class="ref"> (see August 2nd)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-11-05">November 5</span></p>
<p>Great Britain and France formally declare war on Turkey<span class="ref"> (see 1st and 11th, and October 31st)</span>.</p>
<p>Great Britain annexes Cyprus.</p>
<p><span class="op">Attack on <span class="place">Tanga</span></span> ends. British force repulsed<span class="ref"> (see 2nd, and July 7th, 1916)</span>.</p>
<p>Belgian Government reject Papal mediation<span class="ref"> (see July 30th, 1915)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-11-06">November 6</span></p>
<p>Advanced troops of Indian Expeditionary Force "D" effect landing in Mesopotamia at Fao<span class="ref"> (see 22nd, and October 23rd)</span>.</p>
<p>Turkey severs diplomatic relations with Belgium.</p>
<p>British submarine "<span class="notation" content="B11">B.-11</span>" proceeds two miles up the <span class="place">Dardanelles</span>. (First warship to enter Straits.)<span class="ref"> (See December 13th).</span></p>
<p>Keupri-Keui (Armenia) taken by Russian forces<span class="ref"> (see 14th)</span>.</p>
<p>French Government issue declaration modifying list of contraband<span class="ref"> (see August 25th, 1914, and January 3rd, 1915)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-11-07">November 7</span></p>
<p><span class="place">Tsingtau</span> capitulates to Japanese forces<span class="ref"> (see September 2nd and 23rd, 1914, and August 6th, 1915)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-11-09">November 9</span></p>
<p>German cruiser "<span class="vessel">Emden</span>" destroyed by H.M.A.S. "<span class="vessel">Sydney</span>" at the Cocos Islands<span class="ref"> (see October 28th)</span>.</p>
<p>German gunboat "<span class="vessel">Geier</span>" interned at Honolulu.</p>
<p>British and French Governments conclude convention as to naval "prizes"<span class="ref"> (see August 6th, 1914, and January 15th, 1917)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-11-10">November 10</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the Yser</span> ends (French date)<span class="ref"> (see October 10th)</span>.</p>
<p>Dixmude stormed by German forces<span class="ref"> (see September 29th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p>Przemysl again isolated by Russian forces<span class="ref"> (see October 9th)</span>. Second Siege begins<span class="ref"> (see March 22nd, 1915)</span>.</p>
<p>British force storms Sheikh Saïd (Southern Arabia) and destroys the defences (10th/11th).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-11-11">November 11</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Nonneboschen</span> (Ypres). Attack by German Guard repulsed<span class="ref"> (see 22nd, and October 19th and 31st)</span>.</p>
<p>Memel (East Prussia) occupied by Russian forces (approximate date)<span class="ref"> (see February 17th, 1015)</span>.</p>
<p>The Sheikh ul Islam issues Fatwa declaring Jehad (Holy War) against all the Allies<span class="ref"> (see 2nd, 5th, and 14th)</span>.</p>
<p>H.M.S. "<span class="vessel">Niger</span>" sunk by German submarine off Deal.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-11-12">November 12</span></p>
<p>Orders issued for all British aeroplanes on Western front to bear distinguishing marks<span class="ref"> (see September 28th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-11-13">November 13</span></p>
<p>Dutch Government protest against modifications of the Declaration of London<span class="ref"> (see October 29th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person" content="Sir Arthur Arnold Barrett">Lieut.-General Sir A. Barrett</span> takes over command of Indian Expeditionary Force "D" in Mesopotamia<span class="ref"> (see September 28th, 1914, and April 9th, 1915)</span>.</p></div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-11-14">November 14</span></p>
<p>Keupri-Keui (Armenia) retaken by Turkish forces<span class="ref"> (see 6th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Field-Marshal Earl Roberts</span> dies in France.</p>
<p><span class="person">Sultan of Turkey</span> as Khalif proclaims Jehad against those making war on Turkey or her allies<span class="ref"> (see 11th)</span>.</p>
<p>Japanese Cabinet decide against despatch of troops or warships to Europe<span class="ref"> (see February 8th, 1916, and April 17th, 1917)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-11-15">November 15</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Cracow</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see December 2nd)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Second Russian invasion of North Hungary</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see October 8th and December 12th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Affair of Saihan</span> (Mesopotamia).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-11-16">November 16</span></p>
<p>First units of Indian Expeditionary Force "F" land in Egypt<span class="ref"> (see 2nd, and March 25th, 1915)</span>.</p>
<p>Second German offensive against Warsaw. <span class="op">Battle of Lodz</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see December 15th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-11-17">November 17</span></p>
<p>Libau (Baltic) bombarded by German squadron<span class="ref"> (see August 2nd)</span>.</p>
<p>German cruiser "<span class="vessel">Friedrich Karl</span>" sunk by mine in the Baltic.</p>
<p>Trebizond (Black Sea) bombarded by Russian squadron<span class="ref"> (see April 6th, 1916)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Affair of Sahil</span> (Mesopotamia).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-11-18">November 18</span></p>
<p>Re-transfer of French Government from Bordeaux to Paris begins<span class="ref"> (see September 2nd)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-11-20">November 20</span></p>
<p>British, Belgian, and French Governments withdraw proposal for neutralisation of African free trade zone in view of altered situation<span class="ref"> (see August 22nd)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-11-21">November 21</span></p>
<p>British naval air raid on Friedrichshaven.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-11-22">November 22</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battles of Ypres, 1914</span>, ends<span class="ref"> (see October 19th, 31st, and November 11th, 1914, and April 22nd, 1915)</span>.</p>
<p>War Office assume control of the British operations in East Africa. Basra (Mesopotamia) occupied by British forces<span class="ref"> (see 6th)</span>. Formal occupation took place on the 23rd.</p>
<p>Keupri-Keui (Armenia) again taken by Russian forces<span class="ref"> (see 14th, and December 17th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-11-23">November 23</span></p>
<p>Netherlands Overseas Trust formed<span class="ref"> (see June 3rd, 1915)</span>.</p>
<p>Portuguese Government announce prospective co-operation of Portugal with Great Britain<span class="ref"> (see August 8th, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-11-26">November 26</span></p>
<p>H.M.S. "<span class="vessel">Bulwark</span>" destroyed by internal explosion in Sheerness harbour.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-11-27">November 27</span></p>
<p><span class="person" content="Paul von Hindenburg">General von Hindenburg</span> promoted Field-Marshal<span class="ref"> (see September 18th, 1914, and August 29th, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-11-28">November 28</span></p>
<p>Affair of Miranshah (North-West Frontier of India) (28th/29th). First outbreak on North-West Frontier of India caused by German intrigues.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-11-30">November 30</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Lowicz-Sanniki</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see December 17th)</span>.</p>
<p>Belgrade evacuated by retreating Serbian forces<span class="ref"> (see October 30th)</span>.</p>
</div>

<!-- December 1914 -->

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-12-01">December 1</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Limanova-Lapanov</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see 17th)</span>.</p>
<p>First units of Australian and New Zealand Expeditionary Forces arrive at Suez<span class="ref"> (see October 10th and 17th, 1914, and February 20th and April 25th, 1915)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">General de Wet</span>, the leader of South African rebellion, captured by Union troops<span class="ref"> (see 28th, and September 15th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-12-02">December 2</span></p>
<p>Austrian forces cross the Danube and occupy Belgrade<span class="ref"> (see 15th, and November 30th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Cracow</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see November 15th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-12-03">December 3</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the Kolubara</span> (Serbia) begins<span class="ref"> (see 6th)</span>.</p>
<p>British Government agree to Japanese request that Australia should not occupy German islands north of the Equator<span class="ref"> (see 16th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-12-04">December 4</span></p>
<p><span class="op">First action of Qurna</span> (Mesopotamia) begins<span class="ref"> (see 8th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">General Wapshare</span> succeeds <span class="person">General Aitken</span> in <span class="role" content="British Commander-in-Chief in East Africa">command of the British forces in East Africa</span>: latter recalled<span class="ref"> (see October 31st and November 5th, 1914, and April 16th, 1915)</span>.</p>
<p>Portuguese Expeditionary Force leaves Lisbon for Angola<span class="ref"> (see October 26th, 1914, and August 8th, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-12-05">December 5</span></p>
<p>Entente <i>démarche</i> in Athens, Sofia, and Bukharest to secure help for Serbia<span class="ref"> (see 6th, and January 24th, 1915)</span>.</p>
<p>Serbian Government declare that Serbia will never make peace without Allied consent.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-12-06">December 6</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the Kolubara</span> ends. Austrian forces routed by the Serbians and driven northwards<span class="ref"> (see 3rd)</span>.</p>
<p>Rumanian Government decline to guarantee Greece against German attack<span class="ref"> (see 5th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-12-07">December 7</span></p>
<p><span class="role" content="British Envoy to the Vatican">British Envoy</span> (<span class="person">Sir H. Howard</span>) appointed to the Vatican.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-12-08">December 8</span></p>
<p><span class="op">First action of Qurna</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see 4th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the Falklands</span>. <span class="person">Admiral von Spee</span>'s squadron destroyed. "<span class="vessel">Scharnhorst</span>," "<span class="vessel">Gneisenau</span>," "<span class="vessel">Leipzig</span>," and "<span class="vessel">Nürnberg</span>" sunk. <span class="person">Admiral von Spee</span> killed<span class="ref"> (see November 1st)</span>. "<span class="vessel">Dresden</span>" escapes<span class="ref"> (see March 14th, 1915)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-12-09">December 9</span></p>
<p>Qurna occupied by British forces<span class="ref"> (see 8th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-12-10">December 10</span></p>
<p><span class="person">Field-Marshal von der Goltz</span> leaves Germany to take over control of the Turkish Army<span class="ref"> (see November 24th. 1915, and April 19th, 1916)</span>.</p>
<p>Batum (Georgia) bombarded by the "<span class="vessel">Goeben</span>" and "<span class="vessel">Breslau</span>."</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-12-11">December 11</span></p>
<p><span class="person">Dr. B. L. Machado Guimarães</span>, <span class="role">Portuguese Premier</span>, resigns (appointed June 23rd, 1914)<span class="ref"> (see 12th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-12-12">December 12</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Second Russian invasion of North Hungary</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see November 15th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Senhor V. H. d'Azevedo Coutinho</span> appointed <span class="role">Portuguese Premier</span><span class="ref"> (see 11th, and January 25th, 1915)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-12-13">December 13</span></p>
<p>Turkish battleship "<span class="vessel" content="Mesudiye">Messoudieh</span>" sunk by British submarine "<span class="notation" content="B11">B.-11</span>" in the <span class="place">Dardanelles</span><span class="ref"> (see November 6th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-12-14">December 14</span></p>
<p>Allied demonstrations on Flanders front begin. Attack on Wytschaete.</p>
<p>German armed merchant cruiser "<span class="vessel">Cormoran</span>" (ex-Russian S.S. "<span class="vessel">Ryasan</span>") interned at Guam.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-12-15">December 15</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Lodz</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see November 16th)</span>.</p>
<p>Belgrade occupied by Serbian forces<span class="ref"> (see 2nd)</span>. End of Second Austrian invasion of Serbia<span class="ref"> (see October 6th and 9th, 1915)</span>.</p>
<p>German airship sighted off East Coast of England (first appearance of hostile aircraft in vicinity of British Isles<span class="ref"> (see 21st)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-12-16">December 16</span></p>
<p>Scarborough and Hartlepool (East coast of England) bombarded by German battle cruiser squadron.</p>
<p><span class="role" content="Japanese Minister for Foreign Affairs">Japanese Foreign Minister</span> declares <span class="polity">Japan</span> will not give up German islands occupied north of the Equator<span class="ref"> (see 3rd, and February 14th, 1917)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-12-17">December 17</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Lowicz-Sanniki</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see November 30th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Limanova-Lapanov</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see 1st)</span>.</p>
<p>Turkish Offensive in the Caucasus begins. Keupri-Keui retaken<span class="ref"> (see 29th, November 22nd, 1914, and January 17th, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-12-18">December 18</span></p>
<p>British Protectorate over Egypt proclaimed.</p>
<p>Meeting of Scandinavian Kings at Malmo.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the Rawka-Bzura</span> begins. This battle had no definite end; operations subsided into trench warfare.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-12-19">December 19</span></p>
<p>British Government declare <span class="person">Khedive Abbas Hilmi</span> deposed, and proclaim <span class="person">Prince Hussein Kamel Pasha</span> as <span class="role">Sultan of Egypt</span><span class="ref"> (see October 9th, 1917)</span>.</p>
<p>Great Britain declares adherence to Franco Moorish-Treaty of 1912.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-12-20">December 20</span></p>
<p><span class="op">First Battle of Champagne</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see March 17th, 1915)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">British defence of Givenchy, 1914</span> (20th/21st).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-12-21">December 21</span></p>
<p>First German air raid on England. Aeroplane drops bombs in sea near Dover<span class="ref"> (see 24th, January 19th, 1915, and July 20th and August 5th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="place">Jasin</span> (East Africa) occupied by British forces<span class="ref"> (see January 18th and 19th, 1915)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-12-23">December 23</span></p>
<p>British Proclamation issued containing revised list of contraband<span class="ref"> (see September 21st, 1914, and March 11th, 1915)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-12-24">December 24</span></p>
<p>Second air raid on England<span class="ref"> (see 21st)</span>. First bomb dropped on English soil (near Dover).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-12-25">December 25</span></p>
<p>British seaplane raid on Cuxhaven.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-12-26">December 26</span></p>
<p>Italian force lands at <span class="place">Valona</span>; Italy notifies Austria of provisional occupation<span class="ref"> (see May 29th, 1915)</span>.</p>
<p>Garibaldi's Italian Foreign Legion in action for first time on French front.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-12-28">December 28</span></p>
<p>End of organised rebellion in South Africa<span class="ref"> (see September 15th, 1914, and January 11th, 1915)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-12-29">December 29</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Sarikamish</span> (Caucasus) begins<span class="ref"> (see 17th, and January 2nd, 1915)</span>.</p>
<p>British Government send memorandum to United States Government in defence of British blockade policy.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-12-30">December 30</span></p>
<p>Russian Commander-in-Chief (<span class="person">Grand Duke Nicholas</span>) suggests a British expedition against the Turks to ease Russian situation in the Caucasus<span class="ref"> (see January 13th, 1915)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1914-12-31">December 31</span></p>
<p>Indian Expeditionary Force "C" (East Africa) absorbed into Indian Expeditionary Force "B"<span class="ref"> (see September 1st and October 31st)</span>.</p>
</div>

<h2 id="1915">1915</h2>

<!-- January 1915 -->

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-01-01">January 1</span></p>
<p>H.M.S. "<span class="vessel">Formidable</span>" sunk by German submarine in the English Channel.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-01-02">January 2</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Sarikamish</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see December 29th, 1914, and April 4th,1918)</span>.</p>
<p>Urmia (North Persia) evacuated by Russian forces<span class="ref"> (see April 16th)</span>. This city was occupied by Russian forces before the outbreak of the War.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-01-03">January 3</span></p>
<p>French Government issue further revised list of contraband<span class="ref"> (see November 6th, 1914)</span>.</p>

</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-01-04">January 4</span></p>
<p>London Stock Exchange reopens<span class="ref"> (see July 31st, 1914)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-01-05">January 5</span></p>
<p>German attack on Edea (Cameroons) repulsed by French garrison.</p>
<p>Tabriz (North Persia) evacuated by Russian forces<span class="ref"> (see 8th and 30th)</span>. This city was occupied by Russian forces before the outbreak of the War.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-01-06">January 6</span></p>
<p>German S.S. "<span class="vessel">Dacia</span>" (interned in the United States) sold to <span class="person">Mr. Breitung</span>, an American citizen<span class="ref"> (see February 11th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-01-08">January 8</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Soissons</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see 14th)</span>.</p>
<p>Tabriz (North Persia) occupied by Turkish forces<span class="ref"> (see 5th and 30th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Kara Urgan</span> (Caucasus) begins<span class="ref"> (see 13th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-01-10">January 10</span></p>
<p>British defence of Muscat (Eastern Arabia) (10th/11th).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-01-11">January 11</span></p>
<p>Rumanian Government negotiate loan of £5,000,000 in Great Britain.</p>
<p>Last rebels in the Transvaal captured<span class="ref"> (see December 28th, 1914)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-01-12">January 12</span></p>
<p>Mafia Island (<span class="place">German East Africa</span>) seized by a British force.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-01-13">January 13</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Kara Urgan</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see 8th)</span>.</p>
<p>British War Council resolve that the Admiralty should prepare for a naval expedition in February against the <span class="place">Dardanelles</span><span class="ref"> (see 28th, and December 30th, 1914)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Baron Burian</span> succeeds <span class="person">Count Berchtold</span> (appointed February 19th, 1912) as <span class="role">Austro-Hungarian Minister for Foreign Affairs</span><span class="ref"> (see December 22nd, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-01-14">January 14</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Soissons</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see 8th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="place">Swakopmund</span> (<span class="place">German South-West Africa</span>) occupied by South African forces.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-01-15">January 15</span></p>
<p>Existence of secret agreement for mutual support between Italy and Rumania announced by respective Governments.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-01-18">January 18</span></p>
<p>German attack on <span class="place">Jasin</span> (East Africa) begins<span class="ref"> (see 19th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-01-19">January 19</span></p>
<p>First airship raid on England<span class="ref"> (see December 21st, 1914, and August 5th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="place">Jasin</span> (East Africa) captured by German forces<span class="ref"> (see 18th, and December 21st, 1914)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-01-21">January 21</span></p>
<p><span class="person" content="Erich von Falkenhayn">LieutGeneral von Falkenhayn</span> (appointed in 1906) succeeded as <span class="role">German Minister for War</span> by <span class="person" content="Adolf Wild von Hohenborn">Lieut-General Wild von Hohenborn</span><span class="ref"> (see October 30th, 1916)</span>. <span class="person" content="Erich von Falkenhayn">General von Falkenhayn</span> remains Chief of the General Staff<span class="ref"> (see August 29th, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-01-23">January 23</span></p>
<p>Defence of Upington (South Africa) (23rd/24th).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-01-24">January 24</span></p>
<p>Action of the Dogger Bank. German cruiser "<span class="vessel">Blücher</span>" sunk.</p>
<p>German airship "<span class="notation" content="PL19">P.L.-19</span>" brought down near Libau.</p>
<p><span class="person" content="Archibald Murray">Lieut.-General Sir A. J. Murray</span> resigns as <span class="role">Chief of the General Staff, British Expeditionary Force, France</span><span class="ref"> (see 25th, and August 4th, 1914)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person" content="Sir William Robertson">LieutGeneral Sir W. Robertson</span> resigns as <span class="role">Quartermaster-General, British Expeditionary Force, France</span><span class="ref"> (see 25th and 27th, and August 4th, 1914)</span>.</p>
<p>British Government offer Greek Government concessions in Asia Minor in return for help to Serbia<span class="ref"> (see 25th and 29th, April 12th, 1915, and December 5th, 1914)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-01-25">January 25</span></p>
<p><span class="person" content="Sir William Robertson">LieutGeneral Sir W. Robertson</span> appointed <span class="role">Chief of the General Staff, British Expeditionary Force, France</span><span class="ref"> (see 24th, and December 22nd)</span>.</p>
<p>Rumania refuses Entente suggestion that she should join Greece in support of Serbia<span class="ref"> (see 24th and 29th, October 15th, 1915, and December 6th, 1914)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">General Pimenta da Castro</span> succeeds <span class="person">Senhor Coutinho</span> as <span class="role">Portuguese Premier</span><span class="ref"> (see December 12th, 1914, and May 14th, 1915)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-01-26">January 26</span></p>
<p>Turkish advance on Egypt through Sinai begins<span class="ref"> (see February 2nd)</span>.</p>
<p>Entente Governments agree to hold "Pact of London" applicable to war with Turkey<span class="ref"> (see September 5th, 1914)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-01-27">January 27</span></p>
<p><span class="person">Lieut.-General Sir R. C. Maxwell</span> appointed <span class="role">Quartermaster-General, British Expeditionary Force, France</span><span class="ref"> (see 24th, and December 22nd, 1917)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-01-28">January 28</span></p>
<p>British Government definitely decide to make naval attack on the <span class="place">Dardanelles</span><span class="ref"> (see 13th)</span>.</p>
<p>United States S.V. "<span class="vessel">William P. Frye</span>" sunk by German armed merchant cruiser "<span class="vessel">Prinz Eitel Friedrich</span>"<span class="ref"> (see August 6th, 1914, and April 8th, 1915)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-01-29">January 29</span></p>
<p>Walney Island battery (Barrow-in-Furness) shelled by German submarine (first operation of German submarines in the Irish Sea).</p>
<p>Greek Government decline to intervene on behalf of Serbia (set 24th and 25th, and February 15th).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-01-30">January 30</span></p>
<p>Tabriz (North Persia) reoccupied by Russian forces<span class="ref"> (see 8th, and June 14th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p>British Admiralty warn British merchant vessels to fly neutral or no ensigns in vicinity of British Isles<span class="ref"> (see February 6th, 7th and 11th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-01-31">January 31</span></p>
<p>Arab forces (Idrisi) occupy Farasan Islands in the Red Sea<span class="ref"> (see April 28th)</span>.</p>
</div>

<!-- February 1915 -->

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-02-01">February 1</span></p>
<p>British Admiralty issue orders forbidding neutral fishing vessels to use British ports.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-02-02">February 2</span></p>
<p>Turkish advance-guards reach the Suez Canal<span class="ref"> (see 3rd, and January 20th)</span>.</p>
<p>Aden Protectorate invaded by Turkish forces.</p>
<p>Entente communication to Greek, Serbian, and Montenegrin Governments deprecating their intervention in Albania<span class="ref"> (see June 26th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-02-03">February 3</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Actions on the Suez Canal</span> begin<span class="ref"> (see 4th)</span>.</p>
<p>Bulgarian Government negotiate loan of £3,000,000 in Germany<span class="ref"> (see August 6th)</span>.</p>
<p>Agreement concluded between Great Britain and Belgium concerning delimitation of Uganda-Congo boundary.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-02-04">February 4</span></p>
<p><span class="op">The Winter Battle in Masuria</span> (East Prussia) begins<span class="ref"> (see 22nd)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Actions on the Suez Canal</span> end<span class="ref"> (see 3rd)</span>. Turkish forces retreat into Sinai.</p>
<p>German Government announce that submarine blockade of Great Britain will begin on the 18th February.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-02-05">February 5</span></p>
<p>British, French and Russian Governments agree to pool their financial resources<span class="ref"> (see June 3rd)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-02-06">February 6</span></p>
<p>British S.S. "<span class="vessel">Lusitania</span>" arrives at Liverpool flying United States flag<span class="ref"> (see 7th, January 30th and May 7th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-02-07">February 7</span></p>
<p>British Foreign Office issue statement justifying use of neutral flag at sea<span class="ref"> (see 6th, 11th, and January 30th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-02-09">February 9</span></p>
<p>1st Canadian Division crosses from England to France (9th/llth)<span class="ref"> (see October 15th, 1914)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-02-11">February 11</span></p>
<p>United States Government send Note to British Government deprecating use of neutral flag<span class="ref"> (see 7th)</span>.</p>
<p>S.S. "<span class="vessel">Dacia</span>" sails from United States for Bremen (Germany) with cargo of cotton<span class="ref"> (see 27th, and January 6th)</span></p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-02-15">February 15</span></p>
<p>Entente Governments suggest to Greek Government that Greece should intervene in support of Serbia, and promise military support at Salonika<span class="ref"> (see January 29th and March 5th)</span>.</p>
<p>Mutiny of the 5th Light Infantry (Indian Army) at Singapore.</p>
<p>Agreement concluded between Great Britain and France supplementing "prize" convention of November 9th, 1914.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-02-16">February 16</span></p>
<p>Oyem (Cameroons) occupied by French forces.</p>
<p>British Government decide to send a division (the 29th) to the <span class="place">Dardanelles</span><span class="ref"> (see 20th, and April 25th)</span>.</p>
<p>British Government extend prohibition of "trading with the enemy" to territories in British, enemy, or friendly occupation.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-02-17">February 17</span></p>
<p>Czernowitz (Bukovina) retaken by Austrian forces<span class="ref"> (see October 28th. 1914, and June 17th, 1916)</span>.</p>
<p>Memel reoccupied by German forces<span class="ref"> (see November 11th, 1914, and March 18th, 1915)</span>.</p>
<p>German airship "<span class="notation" content="L3">L.-3</span>" stranded and destroyed off Fano, and "<span class="notation" content="L4">L.-4</span>" destroyed near Blaavands Huk (Denmark).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-02-18">February 18</span></p>
<p>German submarine blockade of Great Britain begins<span class="ref"> (see 4th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-02-19">February 19</span></p>
<p>Allied naval attack on the <span class="place">Dardanelles</span> forts commences<span class="ref"> (see March 18th)</span>.</p>
<p>Stanislau (Galicia) captured by Austrian forces<span class="ref"> (see October 30th, 1914, and March 4th, 1915)</span>.</p>
<p>Norwegian S.S. "<span class="vessel">Belridge</span>" torpedoed, but reaches port. First ship torpedoed by German submarine without warning<span class="ref"> (see October 20th, 1914, and March 13th, 1915)</span>. German Government subsequently asserted that this ship was attacked in error.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-02-20">February 20</span></p>
<p>Orders issued for employment at the <span class="place">Dardanelles</span> of the Australian and New Zealand troops in Egypt<span class="ref"> (see 16th, and December 1st, 1914)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Muavin ed Douleh</span> succeeds <span class="person">Ala es Sultaneh</span> as <span class="role">Persian Foreign Minister</span><span class="ref"> (see August 19th, 1914, and April 26th, 1915)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-02-22">February 22</span></p>
<p><span class="op">The Winter Battle in Masuria</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see 4th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Przasnysz</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see 27th)</span>.</p>
<p>Net barrage across North Channel (between Ireland and Scotland) established.</p>
<p>South African Northern Force begins advance from <span class="place">Swakopmund</span> on <span class="place">Windhuk</span><span class="ref"> (see January 14th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-02-23">February 23</span></p>
<p>Lemnos (Ægean) occupied by British marines<span class="ref"> (see March 7th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-02-24">February 24</span></p>
<p>The first British Territorial division (the North Midland) leaves England for France. Not to be confused with first division of the New Armies, for which see May 9th.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-02-26">February 26</span></p>
<p>Liquid fire first used by the Germans on the Western front.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-02-27">February 27</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Przasnysz</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see 22nd)</span>.</p>
<p>S.S. "<span class="vessel">Dacia</span>" intercepted and seized by French naval forces<span class="ref"> (see 11th, and March 22nd)</span>.</p>
</div>

<!-- March 1915 -->

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-03-01">March 1</span></p>
<p>British blockade of <span class="place">German East Africa</span> commences.</p>
<p>Antivari bombarded by Austrian squadron<span class="ref"> (see January 22nd, 1916)</span>.</p>
<p>Joint declaration signed by Great Britain and France to prevent trade by or with Germany<span class="ref"> (see April 17th, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-03-04">March 4</span></p>
<p>Stanislau (Galicia) recaptured by Russian forces<span class="ref"> (see February 19th and June 8th)</span>.</p>
<p>French Government decide to send Expeditionary Force to the <span class="place">Dardanelles</span><span class="ref"> (see February 16th and 20th, and April 25th)</span>.</p>
<p>First case of "indicator" nets aiding in the destruction of a German submarine ("<span class="notation" content="U8">U.-8</span>," in Straits of Dover).  First experimented with in January 1915.</p>
<p>Russian Government send circular telegram to Entente Governments laying claim to Constantinople<span class="ref"> (see 12th)</span>.</p>

</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-03-05">March 5</span></p>
<p><span class="role">Greek Premier</span> (<span class="person">M. Venizelos</span>) proffers Greek fleet and troops to Entente for operations at the <span class="place">Dardanelles</span><span class="ref"> (see 6th, and February 15th and September 21st)</span>.</p>
<p>Bombardment of Smyrna by British squadron under <span class="person">Admiral Peirse</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see 9th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-03-06">March 6</span></p>
<p><span class="person">King of Greece</span> refuses assent to policy of <span class="person">M. Venizelos</span><span class="ref"> (see 5th)</span>. <span class="person">M. Venizelos</span> resigns office as Premier<span class="ref"> (see 9th, and August 22nd)</span> (date of appointment October 19th, 1910).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-03-07">March 7</span></p>
<p>Greek Government request explanation of British occupation of Lemnos<span class="ref"> (see 9th, and February 23rd)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-03-09">March 9</span></p>
<p>British bombardment of Smyrna ends<span class="ref"> (see 5th and 15th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">M. Gounaris</span> appointed Premier of Greece<span class="ref"> (see 6th, and August 22nd)</span>.</p>
<p>British Government reply to Greek Government as to occupation of Lemnos, pleading military necessity<span class="ref"> (see 7th and 20th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-03-10">March 10</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Neuve Chapelle</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see 13th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-03-11">March 11</span></p>
<p>British "Retaliatory Order in Council" relating to detention of enemy goods and Proclamation extending list of "absolute" contraband issued<span class="ref"> (see 12th, and December 23rd, 1914)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-03-12">March 12</span></p>
<p>Dutch Government issue warning that foreign merchant ships using Dutch flag will be detained<span class="ref"> (see January 30th and February 11th)</span>.</p>
<p>British Government notify Russian Government of their acceptance of Russian claims to Constantinople<span class="ref"> (see 4th, April 12th, 1915, and December 2nd, 1916)</span>.</p>
<p>French Government issue decrees similar to British Order in Council and Proclamation of the 11th March.</p>
<p><span class="person" content="Sir Ian Hamilton">General Sir Ian Hamilton</span> appointed Commander-in-Chief, Mediterranean (<span class="place">Dardanelles</span>) Expeditionary Force<span class="ref"> (see 17th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-03-13">March 13</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Neuve Chapelle</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see 10th)</span>.</p>
<p>Agreement signed by French and Belgian Governments suspending Franco-Belgian Convention of July 30th, 1891, regarding military service laws.</p>
<p>Swedish S.S. "<span class="vessel">Hanna</span>" torpedoed without warning. First neutral ship actually sunk by German submarine<span class="ref"> (see 25th and 28th, and February 19th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-03-14">March 14</span></p>
<p>Light cruiser "<span class="vessel">Dresden</span>," the last German cruiser left at sea, sunk by British warships in Chilean waters off Juan Fernandez<span class="ref"> (see December 8th, 1914, and April 26th, 1915)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Mushir ed Douleh</span> succeeds <span class="person">Mustaufi ul Mamalek</span> as <span class="role">Persian Prime Minister</span><span class="ref"> (see August 19th, 1914, and April 26th, 1915)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-03-15">March 15</span></p>
<p>British Squadron blockading Smyrna withdrawn<span class="ref"> (see 5th and 9th)</span>.</p>
<p>First merchant ship (S.S. "<span class="vessel">Blonde</span>") attacked by aircraft.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-03-17">March 17</span></p>
<p>French Government lodge claim with British Government to Syria and Cilicia<span class="ref"> (see April 26th, 1916)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person" content="Sir Ian Hamilton">General Sir Ian Hamilton</span> takes over command of Dardanelles Expeditionary Force<span class="ref"> (see 12th, and October 15th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">First Battle of Champagne</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see December 20th, 1914)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-03-18">March 18</span></p>
<p>Allied Naval attack on the <span class="place">Dardanelles</span> forts repulsed<span class="ref"> (see February 19th)</span>. French battleship "<span class="vessel">Bouvet</span>" and British battleships "<span class="vessel">Irresistible</span>" and "<span class="vessel">Ocean</span>" sunk.</p>
<p>Memel (East Prussia) again captured by Russian forces<span class="ref"> (see 21st, and February 17th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person" content="Sir John Eccles Nixon">General Sir John Nixon</span> appointed <span class="role">Commander-in-Chief British Forces in Mesopotamia</span><span class="ref"> (see April 9th)</span>.</p>
<p>British Government conclude agreement with American cotton interests that cotton should be contraband.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-03-19">March 19</span></p>
<p>Dutch Government lodge protest against blockade policy of the Entente<span class="ref"> (see 11th and 12th)</span>.</p></div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-03-20">March 20</span></p>
<p>Action of Jakalswater (<span class="place">German South-West Africa</span>).</p>
<p>British Government guarantee Greece eventual cession of Lemnos by Turkey<span class="ref"> (see 9th and July 25th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-03-21">March 21</span></p>
<p>Memel (East Prussia) reoccupied by German forces<span class="ref"> (see 18th)</span>.</p>
<p>First German airship raid on Paris takes place<span class="ref"> (see August 30th, 1914, and January 29th, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-03-22">March 22</span></p>
<p>Przemysl capitulates to Russian forces<span class="ref"> (see November 10th, 1914, and June 3rd, 1915)</span>.</p>
<p>French Prize Court declare seizure of S.S. "<span class="vessel">Dacia</span>" valid<span class="ref"> (see February 27th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-03-23">March 23</span></p>
<p>First kite-balloon ship, H.M.S. "<span class="vessel">Manica</span>," commissioned.</p>
<p>Chinese and <span class="polity" content="Japan">Japanese Government</span>s conclude secret agreement as to future policy in Manchuria.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-03-25">March 25</span></p>
<p>Indian Expeditionary Force "F" (in Egypt) absorbed into Indian Expeditionary Force "E"<span class="ref"> (see October 2nd, 1914, and November 2nd and 16th, 1914)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">General Liman von Sanders</span> appointed to command Turco-German Forces, <span class="place">Dardanelles</span>.</p>
<p>Dutch S.S. "<span class="vessel">Medea</span>" captured by German submarine and sunk. (First neutral ship sunk after visit and search)<span class="ref"> (see 13th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-03-27">March 27</span></p>
<p>Bosporus forts bombarded by Russian Black Sea Fleet<span class="ref"> (see April 25th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-03-28">March 28</span></p>
<p>The first passenger ship (British S.S. "<span class="vessel">Falaba</span>") sunk by a German submarine<span class="ref"> (see 13th, and October 20th, 1914)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-03-29">March 29</span></p>
<p>British Government conclude agreement with American rubber interests that rubber should not be exported except to Great Britain.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-03-30">March 30</span></p>
<p>Aus (<span class="place">German South-West Africa</span>) occupied by South African forces.</p>
</div>

<!-- April 1915 -->

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-04-03">April 3</span></p>
<p>Russian Imperial ukase issued granting municipal self-government to Russian Poland<span class="ref"> (see August 14th, 1914, and November 5th, 1916)</span>.</p>
<p>Indecisive action in Black Sea between the "<span class="vessel">Goeben</span>" and part of the Russian Fleet. Turkish cruiser "<span class="vessel">Medjidieh</span>" sunk by mine off Odessa.</p>
<p>Dover Straits barrage completed.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-04-07">April 7</span></p>
<p>First Indian units of Indian Expeditionary Force "G" (formed from Force "E") sail from Egypt for the <span class="place">Dardanelles</span><span class="ref"> (see December 31st)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-04-08">April 8</span></p>
<p>Deportations and massacres of Armenians by order of the Turkish Government commence (approximate date)<span class="ref"> (see May 24th)</span>.</p>
<p>German armed merchant cruiser "<span class="vessel">Prinz Eitel Friedrich</span>" interned at Newport News, Va.<span class="ref"> (see January 28th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-04-09">April 9</span></p>
<p><span class="person" content="Sir John Eccles Nixon">General Sir John Nixon</span> relieves <span class="person" content="Sir Arthur Arnold Barrett">General Sir Arthur Barrett</span> as Commander-in-Chief Indian Expeditionary Force "D" Mesopotamia<span class="ref"> (see November 13th, 1914, March 18th, 1915, and January 19th, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-04-12">April 12</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Shaiba</span> (Mesopotamia) begins<span class="ref"> (see 14th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">First Allied advance on Yaunde</span> (Cameroons) begins<span class="ref"> (see June 7th and 28th)</span>.</p>
<p>Entente Governments make offer to Greece of Smyrna and hinterland in return for immediate action against Turkey<span class="ref"> (see 14th, and January 24th)</span>.</p>
<p>French Government notify Russian Government of their acceptance of Russian claims to Constantinople<span class="ref"> (see March 12th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-04-14">April 14</span></p>
<p>Germans accuse French of using poison gas near Verdun<span class="ref"> (see 22nd)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Shaiba</span> (Mesopotamia) ends<span class="ref"> (see 12th)</span>.</p>
<p>Greek Government reject Entente offer of Smyrna<span class="ref"> (see 12th)</span>.</p>
<p>British Secretary for the Colonies (<span class="person">Mr. Harcourt</span>) states that Dominions will be consulted as to peace terms<span class="ref"> (see July 14th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="polity" content="Japan">Japanese Government</span> inform British Government of German overtures for separate peace.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-04-16">April 16</span></p>
<p>Urmia (North Persia) occupied by Turkish regular forces<span class="ref"> (see January 2nd and May 24th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">General Tighe</span> succeeds <span class="person">General Wapshare</span> in <span class="role" content="British Commander-in-Chief in East Africa">command of British Forces in East Africa</span><span class="ref"> (see December 4th, 1914, and February 19th, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-04-17">April 17</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Capture of Hill 60</span> (Ypres) (17th/22nd).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-04-18">April 18</span></p>
<p>Operations of Allied Force for capture of Garua (Cameroons) begin<span class="ref"> (see May 31st)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">First Affair of Hafiz Kor</span> (North-West Frontier of India).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-04-20">April 20</span></p>
<p>Armenian revolt at Van: Armenian defence of Van begins<span class="ref"> (see May 19th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-04-22">April 22</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battles of Ypres, 1915</span>, begin<span class="ref"> (see November 22nd, 1914, and May 25th, 1915)</span>. First German gas attack<span class="ref"> (see 14th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-04-23">April 23</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Gravenstafel Ridge</span> (Ypres) (22nd/23rd).</p>
<p>British blockade of the Cameroons commences<span class="ref"> (see February 29th 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-04-24">April 24</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of St. Julien</span> (Ypres) begins<span class="ref"> (see May 4th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-04-25">April 25</span></p>
<p>Allied Forces effect landing at the <span class="place">Dardanelles</span> (25th/26th).</p>
<p>Bosporus forts shelled by Russian Black Sea Fleet<span class="ref"> (see March 27th)</span>.</p>
<p>Action of Gibeon (25th/26th) (<span class="place">German South-West Africa</span>).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-04-26">April 26</span></p>
<p>Secret agreement signed in London between Italian Government and the Entente for Italian co-operation in the war and declarations by which Italy adheres to the Pact of London<span class="ref"> (see September 5th, 1914, and May 4th, November 30th, and December 1st, 1915)</span>.</p>
<p>The last German raider overseas (armed merchant cruiser "<span class="vessel">Kronprinz Wilhelm</span>") interned at Newport News (United States of America)<span class="ref"> (see March 14th)</span>.</p>
<p>French cruiser "<span class="vessel">Leon Gambetta</span>" sunk by Austrian submarine in Straits of Otranto.</p>
<p><span class="person">Mushir ed Douleh</span>, <span class="role">Persian Prime Minister</span>, resigns<span class="ref"> (see March 14th and April 27th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Muavin ed Douleh</span>, <span class="role">Persian Foreign Minister</span>, resigns<span class="ref"> (see February 20th and April 27th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-04-27">April 27</span></p>
<p><span class="person">Ain ed Douleh</span> appointed <span class="role">Persian Prime Minister</span><span class="ref"> (see 26th, and August 17th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Mohtashem ed Douleh</span> appointed <span class="role">Persian Foreign Minister</span><span class="ref"> (see 26th, and March 5th, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-04-28">April 28</span></p>
<p><span class="op">First Battle of Krithia</span> (<span class="place">Dardanelles</span>)<span class="ref"> (see May 6th)</span>.</p>
<p>British Government conclude a treaty with the Idrisi for co-operation against the Turks<span class="ref"> (see January 31st)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-04-30">April 30</span></p>
<p>Shavli (Baltic Provinces) occupied by German forces<span class="ref"> (see May 11th)</span>.</p>
</div>

<!-- May 1915 -->

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-05-01">May 1</span></p>
<p>Austro-German Spring Offensive in Galicia: <span class="op">Battle of Gorlice-Tarnow</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see 5th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Dilman</span> (North Persia).</p>
<p>S.S. "<span class="vessel">Gulflight</span>" torpedoed without warning: damaged, but reaches port. First United States ship attacked by German submarine<span class="ref"> (see February 19th and March 13th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-05-04">May 4</span></p>
<p>Italy denounces the Triple Alliance<span class="ref"> (see April 26th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of St. Julien</span> (Ypres) ends<span class="ref"> (see April 24th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-05-05">May 5</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Gorlice-Tarnow</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see 1st)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-05-06">May 6</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Krithia</span> (<span class="place">Dardanelles</span>) begins<span class="ref"> (see 8th, and April 28th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-05-07">May 7</span></p>
<p>Libau (Baltic Provinces) taken by German forces<span class="ref"> (see April 30th)</span>.</p>
<p>S.S. "<span class="vessel">Lusitania</span>" sunk by German submarine "<span class="notation" content="U20">U.-20</span>" off Queenstown<span class="ref"> (see February 6th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="role" content="British Foreign Secretary">British Foreign Minister</span> (<span class="person">Sir E. Grey</span>) gives conditional guarantee to Serbian Minister of eventual cession of Bosnia and Herzegovina with "wide access to the Adriatic"<span class="ref"> (see August 15th and 30th)</span>.</p>
<p>Japan presents ultimatum to China demanding territorial concessions<span class="ref"> (see 9th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-05-08">May 8</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Frezenberg Ridge</span> (Ypres) begins<span class="ref"> (see 13th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Krithia</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see 6th, and June 4th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-05-09">May 9</span></p>
<p>Allied Spring Offensive begins:—</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Aubers Ridge</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Second Battle of Artois</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see June 18th)</span>.</p>
<p>The leading division of the British New Armies leaves England for France<span class="ref"> (see August 21st, 1914, and February 24th, 1915)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">President Wilson</span>, in a speech, defines United States policy in regard to the "<span class="vessel">Lusitania</span>" outrage<span class="ref"> (see 7th)</span>.</p>
<p>Chinese Government yield to Japanese demands<span class="ref"> (see 7th and 25th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-05-10">May 10</span></p>
<p>Naval Convention signed between Great Britain, France, and Italy.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-05-11">May 11</span></p>
<p>Shavli evacuated by German forces<span class="ref"> (see April 30th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-05-13">May 13</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Frezenberg Ridge</span> (Ypres) ends<span class="ref"> (see 8th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="place">Windhuk</span> (<span class="place">German South-West Africa</span>) occupied by South African Northern Force.</p>
<p>H.M.S. "<span class="vessel">Goliath</span>" sunk by Turkish destroyer in the <span class="place">Dardanelles</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Signor Salandra</span>, <span class="role">Italian Premier</span>, tenders his resignation<span class="ref"> (see 16th, and October 30th, 1914)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Baron Sonnino</span>, <span class="role">Italian Foreign Minister</span>, tenders his resignation<span class="ref"> (see 16th, and November 3rd, 1914)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-05-14">May 14</span></p>
<p>Jaroslaw taken by Austro-German forces<span class="ref"> (see September 21st, 1914)</span>.</p>
<p>Last meeting of British War Council<span class="ref"> (see August 5th, 1914, and June 7th, 1915)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">General da Castro</span>, <span class="role">Portuguese Premier</span>, resigns<span class="ref"> (see 15th, and January 25th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-05-15">May 15</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Festubert</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see 25th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Senhor J. Pinheiro Chagas</span> appointed <span class="role">Portuguese Premier</span><span class="ref"> (see 14th, and June 19th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Lord Fisher</span>, <span class="role">First Sea Lord, Great Britain</span>, tenders his resignation<span class="ref"> (see 28th, and October 30th, 1914)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-05-16">May 16</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the San</span> (Galicia) begins<span class="ref"> (see 23rd)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Signor Salandra</span> reappointed <span class="role">Italian Premier</span> on reconstruction of Cabinet, with <span class="person">Baron Sonnino</span> as <span class="role" content="Italian Foreign Minister">Foreign Minister</span><span class="ref"> (see 13th, and June 11th, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-05-19">May 19</span></p>
<p>Van (Armenia) taken by Russian forces. Armenian garrison relieved<span class="ref"> (see April 20th and August 3rd, 1915, and April 5th, 1918)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-05-21">May 21</span></p>
<p>Russian Expeditionary Force to West Persia lands at Enzeli<span class="ref"> (see February 17th, 1918)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-05-23">May 23</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the San</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see 16th)</span>.</p>
<p>Italian Government order Mobilisation and declare war against Austria.</p>
<p><span class="person">General Cadorna</span> appointed <span class="role">Commander-in-Chief of Italian Armies in the Field</span><span class="ref"> (see November 7th, 1917)</span>. Officially designated "Chief of Staff," the King being the nominal Commander-in-Chief.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-05-24">May 24</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Bellewaerde Ridge</span> (Ypres) (24th/25th).</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Przemysl</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see June 3rd and 11th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the Stryj</span> (Galicia) begins<span class="ref"> (see June 11th)</span>.</p>
<p>Italian forces cross Austrian frontier (midnight 24th/25th).</p>
<p>Germany severs diplomatic relations with Italy<span class="ref"> (see August 28th, 1916)</span>. For the purposes of the Treaty of Versailles it was subsequently assumed that this rupture took place on the 27th, which date was accepted as that of the commencement of Italy's belligerence against Germany.</p>
<p>Urmia (North Persia) retaken by Russian forces<span class="ref"> (see April 16th)</span>.</p>
<p>Entente Governments declare that they will hold Turkish Ministers personally responsible for the Armenian massacres<span class="ref"> (see April 8th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-05-25">May 25</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battles of Ypres, 1915</span>, end<span class="ref"> (see April 22nd, 1915, and July 31st, 1917)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Festubert</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see 15th)</span>.</p>
<p>H.M.S. "<span class="vessel">Triumph</span>" sunk by submarine off the <span class="place">Dardanelles</span>.</p>
<p>Italian fleet commences operations in the Adriatic<span class="ref"> (see 26th)</span>.</p>
<p>Coalition Ministry formed in Great Britain by <span class="person">Mr. Asquith</span><span class="ref"> (see December 11th, 1916)</span>.</p>
<p>Treaty signed between China and Japan concerning Shantung Province<span class="ref"> (see 7th and 9th)</span>.</p>
<p>Treaty signed between China and Japan concerning South Manchuria and Inner Mongolia<span class="ref"> (see 7th and 9th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-05-26">May 26</span></p>
<p>Italian Government announce blockade of Austro-Hungarian coast. British battle squadron concentrates at Malta prior to joining Italian fleet in Adriatic<span class="ref"> (see 27th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-05-27">May 27</span></p>
<p>British squadron joins Italian fleet in the Adriatic<span class="ref"> (see 26th)</span>.</p>
<p>H.M.S. "<span class="vessel">Majestic</span>" sunk by submarine at the <span class="place">Dardanelles</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person" content="Winston Churchill">Mr. Winston Churchill</span>, <span class="role">First Lord of the Admiralty, Great Britain</span>, resigns (appointed October 24th, 1911)<span class="ref"> (see 28th)</span>.</p>
<p>British minelayer "<span class="vessel">Princess Irene</span>" destroyed by internal explosion in Sheerness harbour.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-05-28">May 28</span></p>
<p><span class="person" content="Arthur Balfour">Mr. Arthur Balfour</span> appointed <span class="role">First Lord of the Admiralty, Great Britain</span><span class="ref"> (see 27th, and December 11th, 1910)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Sir Henry Jackson</span> appointed <span class="role">First Sea Lord, Great Britain</span><span class="ref"> (see 15th, and December 3rd, l916)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Dr. Joaquim T. Braga</span> elected <span class="role" content="Portuguese President">President of Portugal</span><span class="ref"> (see 29th, and October 5th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-05-29">May 29</span></p>
<p><span class="place">Valona</span> formally occupied by Italian forces<span class="ref"> (see December 26th, 1914)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Dr. Manoel Arriaga</span>, <span class="role">Portuguese President</span>, resigns (appointed August 24th, 1911)<span class="ref"> (see 28th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-05-30">May 30</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Affair of Sphinxhaven</span> (Lake Nyassa). British command of the lake secured.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-05-31">May 31</span></p>
<p>Siege of Garua (Cameroons) begins<span class="ref"> (see April 18th and June 10th)</span>.</p>
<p>First German airship raid on London area<span class="ref"> (see January 19th 1915, October 19th, 1917, and August 5th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Second action of Qurna</span> (Mesopotamia).</p>
</div>

<!-- June 1915 -->

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-06-02">June 2</span></p>
<p>Blockade of coast of Asia Minor announced by British Government.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-06-03">June 3</span></p>
<p>Przemysl retaken by Austro-German forces<span class="ref"> (see March 22nd and May 24th)</span>.</p>
<p>Amara (Mesopotamia) captured by British forces.</p>
<p>First meeting in Paris of Allied Conference on Economic War<span class="ref"> (see February 5th, 1915, and June 14th, 1916)</span>.</p>
<p>Act passed in British Parliament empowering Customs to compel all exports to Holland to be consigned to the Netherlands Oversea Trust<span class="ref"> (see November 23rd, 1914, and December 7th, 1915)</span>.</p>
<p>San Marino declares war on Austria-Hungary.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-06-04">June 4</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Third Battle of Krithia</span> (<span class="place">Dardanelles</span>).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-06-05">June 5</span></p>
<p>First Conference of British and French Ministers to co-ordinate war policy and strategy held at Calais.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-06-07">June 7</span></p>
<p>German airship "<span class="notation" content="LZ37">L.Z.-37</span>" destroyed in mid-air by <span class="person">Lieut. Warneford</span>, R.N.A.S., near Ghent (first occasion of airship successfully attacked by aeroplane).</p>
<p>Russian and Chinese Governments conclude agreement respecting Mongolia<span class="ref"> (see May 25)</span>.</p>
<p>First meeting of Dardanelles Committee of the British Cabinet<span class="ref"> (see May 14th and October 30th)</span>. Under this title the War Council<span class="ref"> (see August 5th, 1914, and May 14th, 1915)</span> exercised its functions during the critical period of the <span class="place">Dardanelles</span> campaign.</p>
<p><span class="role">Allied Commander-in-Chief in the Cameroons</span> decides to abandon the advance on Yaunde<span class="ref"> (see 28th, and April 12th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-06-08">June 8</span></p>
<p>Stanislau recaptured by Austrian forces<span class="ref"> (see March 4th, 1915, and August 10th, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-06-09">June 9</span></p>
<p>Monfalcone (Isouzo) taken by Italian forces.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-06-10">June 10</span></p>
<p>Garua (Cameroons) capitulates to the Anglo-French force under <span class="person" content="Frederick Hugh Cunliffe">General Cunliffe</span><span class="ref"> (see May 31st)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-06-11">June 11</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Przemysl</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see 3rd, and May 24th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of the Stryj</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see May 24th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-06-14">June 14</span></p>
<p>Turkish Attack on Perim (l4th/15th).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-06-17">June 17</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Third Battle of Lemberg</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see 22nd)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-06-18">June 18</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Second Battle of Artois</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see May 9th and September 25th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-06-19">June 19</span></p>
<p>South African forces begin advance on <span class="place">Otavifontein</span><span class="ref"> (see July 1st)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Dr. Jose de Castro</span> succeeds <span class="person">Senhor J. P. Chagas</span> as <span class="role">Portuguese Premier</span><span class="ref"> (see May 15th and November 29th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-06-22">June 22</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Third Battle of Lemberg</span> ends: city retaken by the Austrian forces<span class="ref"> (see 17th, and September 3rd, 1914, and November 23rd, 1918)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-06-24">June 24</span></p>
<p><span class="person">Mr. Lansing</span> succeeds <span class="person">Mr. Bryan</span> as <span class="role">United States Secretary of State</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-06-26">June 26</span></p>
<p>San Giovanni de Medua (Albania) occupied by Montenegrin forces<span class="ref"> (see July 29th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">General Sukhomlinov</span>, <span class="role">Russian Minister for War</span>, removed from office (appointed in 1909) ; succeeded by <span class="person">General Polivanov</span><span class="ref"> (see March 29th, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-06-27">June 27</span></p>
<p>British advance up the Euphrates begins<span class="ref"> (see July 25th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-06-28">June 28</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Action of Gully Ravine</span> (<span class="place">Dardanelles</span>) begins<span class="ref"> (see July 2nd)</span>.</p>
<p>Operations of the <span class="op" content="First Allied advance on Yaunde">first advance on Yaunde</span> (Cameroons) end<span class="ref"> (see 7th)</span>.</p>
<p>Ngaundere (Cameroons) captured by the Allied Northern Force.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-06-29">June 29</span></p>
<p><span class="op">First Battle of the Isonzo</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see July 7th)</span>.</p>
</div>

<!-- July 1915 -->

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-07-01">July 1</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Second Battle of Krasnik</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see 19th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="place">Otavifontein</span> (<span class="place">German South-West Africa</span>) captured by South African forces<span class="ref"> (see June 19th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-07-02">July 2</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Action of Gully Ravine</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see June 28th)</span>.</p>
<p>Naval action in the Baltic between Russian and German squadrons off Gottland. German minelayer "<span class="vessel">Albatross</span>" driven ashore.</p>
<p>Munitions of War Act, 1915, becomes law in Great Britain.</p>
<p>Ministry of Munitions formed in Great Britain.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-07-04">July 4</span></p>
<p>Lahej (South Arabia) taken by Turkish forces (4th/5th).</p>
<p>Durazzo occupied by Serbian forces<span class="ref"> (see 17th, and October 4th, 1914)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-07-07">July 7</span></p>
<p><span class="op">First Battle of the Isonzo</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see June 29th)</span>.</p>
<p>Italian cruiser "<span class="vessel">Amalfi</span>" sunk by Austrian submarine in the Adriatic.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-07-09">July 9</span></p>
<p><span class="place">German South-West Africa</span> capitulates to <span class="person">General Botha</span><span class="ref"> (see September 19th, 1914)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-07-11">July 11</span></p>
<p>German light cruiser "<span class="vessel">Königsberg</span>" destroyed in Rufiji River, <span class="place">German East Africa</span>, by British monitors<span class="ref"> (see September 20th and October 31st, 1914)</span>.</p>
<p>British residency at Bushire (South Persia) attacked by Tangistani tribesmen<span class="ref"> (see August 8th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-07-13">July 13</span></p>
<p>Great Austro-German Offensive on Eastern front begins.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-07-14">July 14</span></p>
<p>A Dominion Premier (<span class="person">Sir R. Borden</span>, Canada) for the first time attends meeting of the British Cabinet<span class="ref"> (see April 14th)</span>.</p>
<p>Sherif of Mecca opens direct negotiations with British Government for co-operation against the Turks<span class="ref"> (see October 31st, 1914, and October 24th, 1915)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-07-15">July 15</span></p>
<p>National Registration Act becomes law in Great Britain<span class="ref"> (see August 15th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-07-17">July 17</span></p>
<p>Durazzo evacuated by the Serbian forces at request of Italian Government<span class="ref"> (see 4th, and August 31st)</span>.</p>
<p>Treaty of alliance signed at Sofia between Austria-Hungary, Bulgaria, Germany, and Turkey. Albania to be ceded to Bulgaria in return for Bulgarian participation in war.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-07-18">July 18</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Second Battle of the Isonzo</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see August 10th)</span>.</p>
<p>Italian cruiser "<span class="vessel">Giuseppe Garibaldi</span>" sunk by Austrian submarine in the Adriatic.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-07-19">July 19</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Second Battle of Krasnik</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see 1st)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-07-21">July 21</span></p>
<p>Ivangorod (Poland) invested by Austro-German forces<span class="ref"> (see August 5th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-07-22">July 22</span></p>
<p>Bukoba, on Victoria Nyanza (<span class="place">German East Africa</span>), captured by British forces (22nd/23rd).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-07-24">July 24</span></p>
<p>Rozan and Pultusk (North Poland) stormed by German forces.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-07-25">July 25</span></p>
<p>Nasiriya (Mesopotamia) taken by British forces<span class="ref"> (see June 27th)</span>.</p>
<p>British Government guarantee to Greece eventual cession of Mitylene by Turkey<span class="ref"> (see March 20th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-07-26">July 26</span></p>
<p>Pelagosa Island, in Adriatic, occupied by Italian forces.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-07-29">July 29</span></p>
<p>Entente Governments warn Montenegro that they will not recognise her occupation of Albanian territory<span class="ref"> (see June 26th)</span>.</p>
<p>Establishment of the East Persia Cordon (Anglo-Russian) begins<span class="ref"> (see October 7th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-07-30">July 30</span></p>
<p>The Pope sends appeal for peace to belligerent Governments<span class="ref"> (see November 5th, 1914, and August 1st, 1917)</span>.</p>
</div>

<!-- August 1915 -->

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-08-01">August 1</span></p>
<p>Constantinople harbour raided by British submarine.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-08-03">August 3</span></p>
<p>Van (Armenia) evacuated by the Russian forces<span class="ref"> (see 5th, and May 19th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-08-05">August 5</span></p>
<p>Warsaw occupied by German forces<span class="ref"> (see July 13th)</span>.</p>
<p>Ivangorod taken by Austro-German forces<span class="ref"> (see July 21st)</span>.</p>
<p>Van occupied by Turkish forces<span class="ref"> (see 3rd)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-08-06">August 6</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Operations of the landing at Suvla</span> (<span class="place">Dardanelles</span>) begin<span class="ref"> (see 15th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Sari Bair</span> (<span class="place">Dardanelles</span>) begins<span class="ref"> (see 9th and 10th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Dr. Machado Guimarães</span> elected <span class="role">Portuguese President</span><span class="ref"> (see October 5th, 1915, and December 11th, 1917)</span>.</p>
<p>Bulgarian Government negotiate fresh loan for 400,000,000 francs with Austro-German banks<span class="ref"> (see February 3rd)</span>.</p>
<p>Agreement concluded between Japan and China substituting Japanese authority for German in <span class="place">Tsingtau</span> customs<span class="ref"> (see November 7th, 1914)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-08-08">August 8</span></p>
<p>Bushire (South Persia) occupied by British forces<span class="ref"> (see July 12th and September 9th)</span>.</p>
<p>Turkish battleship "<span class="vessel">Barbarousse-Hairedine</span>" sunk by British submarine "<span class="notation" content="E11">E.-11</span>" in the <span class="place">Dardanelles</span>.</p>
<p>German naval attack on Riga begins<span class="ref"> (see 21st)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-08-09">August 9</span></p>
<p>Decisive day of <span class="op">Battle of Sari Bair</span><span class="ref"> (see 6th and 10th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Viscount Kato</span>, <span class="role">Japanese Minister for Foreign Affairs</span>, resigns (previously appointed April 16th, 1914)<span class="ref"> (see 10th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-08-10">August 10</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Sari Bair</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see 6th and 9th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Second Battle of the Isonzo</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see July 18th)</span>.</p>
<p>German airship "<span class="notation" content="L12">L.-12</span>" extensively damaged by British aircraft off Ostend.</p>
<p><span class="person">Marquis Okuma</span> appointed <span class="role">Japanese Minister for Foreign Affairs</span> (<i>ad interim</i>)<span class="ref"> (see 9th, and September 21st)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-08-12">August 12</span></p>
<p>First ship sunk by torpedo from British seaplane (<span class="place">Dardanelles</span>).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-08-13">August 13</span></p>
<p>H.M.T. "<span class="vessel">Royal Edward</span>" sunk in the Ægean by German submarine. First transport so lost.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-08-15">August 15</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Operations of the landing at Suvla</span> end<span class="ref"> (see 6th and 21st)</span>.</p>
<p>Entente Governments make conditional offer of territorial acquisitions to Serbia<span class="ref"> (see 30th, and May 7th)</span>.</p>
<p>National Register taken in Great Britain<span class="ref"> (see July 15th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-08-16">August 16</span></p>
<p>Lowca and Harrington, near Whitehaven (Cumberland), shelled by German submarine.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-08-17">August 17</span></p>
<p>Kowno stormed by German forces (17th/18th).</p>
<p><span class="person">Ain ed Douleh</span>, <span class="role">Persian Prime Minister</span>, resigns<span class="ref"> (see 18th, and April 27th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-08-18">August 18</span></p>
<p><span class="person">Mustaufi ul Mamalek</span> again appointed <span class="role">Persian Prime Minister</span><span class="ref"> (see 17th, and December 24th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-08-19">August 19</span></p>
<p>German battle cruiser "<span class="vessel">Moltke</span>" torpedoed by British submarine "<span class="notation" content="E1">E.-1</span>" in Gulf of Riga.</p>
<p>British submarine "<span class="notation" content="E13">E.-13</span>" attacked by German warships while aground in Danish waters.</p>
<p>British S.S. "<span class="vessel">Arabic</span>" sunk by German submarine.</p>
<p>H.M.S. "<span class="vessel">Baralong</span>" (special service ship) destroys German submarine "<span class="notation" content="U27">U.-27</span>."</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-08-20">August 20</span></p>
<p>Novo-Georgievsk (Poland) stormed by German forces.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-08-21">August 21</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Scimitar Hill</span> (Suvla)<span class="ref"> (see 15th)</span>.</p>
<p>Italy declares war on Turkey.</p>
<p>First authenticated case of German submarine firing on a ship's crew in open boats (British S.S. "<span class="vessel">Ruel</span>").</p>
<p>German naval attack on Riga discontinued<span class="ref"> (see 8th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-08-22">August 22</span></p>
<p>Osovets (North Poland) stormed by German forces.</p>
<p><span class="person">M. Venizelos</span> again appointed Premier of Greece in succession to <span class="person">M. Gounaris</span><span class="ref"> (see March 6th and 9th and October 5th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-08-25">August 25</span></p>
<p>Brest-Litovsk (Poland) taken by German forces (25th/26tb).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-08-26">August 26</span></p>
<p>Byelostok (Poland) taken by German forces.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-08-30">August 30</span></p>
<p><span class="role" content="British Foreign Secretary">British Foreign Minister</span> (<span class="person">Sir E. Grey</span>) informs <span class="person">M. Supilo</span> that, provided Serbia agreed, the Allies could guarantee the eventual freedom and self-determination of Bosnia, Herzegovina, South Dalmatia, Slavonia, and Croatia<span class="ref"> (see 15th, and May 7th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-08-31">August 31</span></p>
<p>Durazzo reoccupied by Serbian forces<span class="ref"> (see July 17th and December 6th)</span>.</p>
</div>

<!-- September 1915 -->

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-09-01">September 1</span></p>
<p>German Government inform United States Government that United States demands for limitation of submarine activity are accepted.</p>
<p>Ruad Island, off Syrian coast, occupied by French forces.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-09-03">September 3</span></p>
<p>Grodno captured by German forces (2nd/3rd).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-09-05">September 5</span></p>
<p><span class="person" content="Nicholas II">The Tsar</span> supersedes the <span class="person">Grand Duke Nicholas</span> in supreme command of the Russian Armies with <span class="person">General Alexeiev</span> as Chief of Staff<span class="ref"> (see 8th, August 3rd, 1914, and March 15th and June 4th, 1917)</span>. Though nominally Chief of Staff, <span class="person">General Alexeiev</span> was virtually Commander-in-Chief ad performed the duties of that office till <span class="person" content="Nicholas II">the Tsar</span>'s abdication on March 15th, 1917, and continued as Commander-in-Chief thereafter without further appointment.</p>
<p><span class="op">Action of Hafiz Kor</span> (North-West Frontier of India).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-09-07">September 7</span></p>
<p>Russian counter-offensive in Galicia. <span class="op">Battle of Tarnopol</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see 16th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-09-08">September 8</span></p>
<p><span class="person">The Grand Duke Nicholas</span> appointed Viceroy of the Caucasus<span class="ref"> (see 5th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Second Allied Attack on Mora</span> (Cameroons) (8th/9th).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-09-09">September 9</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Dvinsk</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see November 1st)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Vilna</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see October 2nd)</span>.</p>
<p>Bushire (South Persia) again attacked by tribesmen<span class="ref"> (see August 8th)</span>.</p>
<p>Turco-Bulgarian Frontier Convention signed at Dimotika.</p>
<p>United States Government request recall of Austro-Hungarian Ambassador, <span class="person">Dr. Dumba</span> (appointed to United States, March 1913)<span class="ref"> (see 28th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-09-16">September 16</span></p>
<p>Pinsk taken by German forces.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Tarnopol</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see 7th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-09-18">September 18</span></p>
<p>Yilna taken by German forces<span class="ref"> (see 9th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-09-21">September 21</span></p>
<p>Bulgarian Government order partial mobilisation<span class="ref"> (see 22nd)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="role">Greek Premier</span> (<span class="person">M. Venizelos</span>) asks for guarantee of 150,000 British and French troops as condition for Greek intervention<span class="ref"> (see 24th, and March 5th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Viscount Ishii</span> succeeds <span class="person">Marquis Okuma</span> as <span class="role">Japanese Minister for Foreign Affairs</span><span class="ref"> (see August 10th, 1915, and October 9th, 1910)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-09-22">September 22</span></p>
<p>"Dede Agatch Agreement" concluded between Turkey and Bulgaria rectifying Turkish frontier in favour of Bulgaria.</p>
<p>Bulgarian Government order general mobilisation for 25th.</p>
<p><span class="op">Second Advance on Yaunde</span> (Cameroons) begins<span class="ref"> (see January 1st, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-09-23">September 23</span></p>
<p>Greek Government order precautionary mobilisation.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-09-24">September 24</span></p>
<p>French and British Governments inform Greek Government that they are prepared to send troops requested<span class="ref"> (see 21st, 27th, and 28th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-09-25">September 25</span></p>
<p>Allied Autumn Offensive begins:—</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Loos</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see October 8th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Third Battle of Artois</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see June 18th and October 15th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Second Battle of Champagne</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see March 17th and November 6th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">General Sir J. Wolfe Murray</span>, <span class="role">Chief of the Imperial General Staff, Great Britain</span>, resigns<span class="ref"> (see 26th, and October 26th, 1914)</span>.</p>
<p>Bulgarian mobilisation begins<span class="ref"> (see 22nd)</span>.</p>
<p>Serbian Government give undertaking to Greek Government to cede Doiran and Gevgeli eventually to Greece, and not to claim Strumitsa.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-09-26">September 26</span></p>
<p><span class="person">Lieut-General Sir A. J. Murray</span> appointed <span class="role">Chief of the Imperial General Staff, Great Britain</span><span class="ref"> (see 25th, and January 24th and December 22nd)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-09-27">September 27</span></p>
<p><span class="role">Greek Premier</span> (<span class="person">M. Venizelos</span>) obtains secret consent of King Constantine to proposed Entente expedition to Salonika<span class="ref"> (see 24th and 28th)</span>.</p>
<p>Italian battleship "<span class="vessel">Benedetto Brin</span>" destroyed by internal explosion in harbour at Brindisi.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-09-28">September 28</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Kut, 1915</span> (Mesopotamia).</p>
<p><span class="person">Dr. Dumba</span>, Austro-Hungarian Ambassador, recalled from United States of America<span class="ref"> (see 9th)</span>.</p>
<p>Greek Government formally refuse French and British "offer" of the 24th<span class="ref"> (see 27th, and October 2nd)</span>.</p>
<p>British and Russian Governments agree to request of Persian Government for a monthly subvention.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-09-30">September 30</span></p>
<p><span class="person">Lord Derby</span> assumes control of recruiting in Great Britain<span class="ref"> (see December 11th, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>

<!-- October 1915 -->

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-10-01">October 1</span></p>
<p>Approximate beginning of period in which the Germans obtained mastery in the air on the Western front (due to the Fokker machine)<span class="ref"> (see April 1st, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-10-02">October 2</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Vilna</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see September 9th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="role">Greek Premier</span> (<span class="person">M. Venizelos</span>) asks British and French Governments to land troops at Salonika as soon as possible<span class="ref"> (see 3rd and 5th, and September 28th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-10-03">October 3</span></p>
<p>Allied troops arrive at Salonika: Greek Government protest against a landing<span class="ref"> (see 2nd, 5th and 6th)</span>.</p>
<p>First German merchant vessel (S.S. "<span class="vessel">Livonia</span>") sunk by British submarine in the Baltic.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-10-04">October 4</span></p>
<p>Entente Powers send ultimatum to Bulgaria<span class="ref"> (see 5th and 13th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-10-05">October 5</span></p>
<p>French and British forces land at Salonika<span class="ref"> (see 3rd)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">King of Greece</span> refuses to support policy of Premier (<span class="person">M. Venizelos</span>)<span class="ref"> (see 2nd, and September 27th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">M. Venizelos</span> again resigns<span class="ref"> (see 6th, and August 22nd, 1915, and June 26th, 1917)</span>.</p>
<p>Russia severs diplomatic relations with Bulgaria<span class="ref"> (see 4th and 19th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Dr. Machado Guimarães</span> succeeds <span class="person">Dr. J. Braga</span> as <span class="role">Portuguese President</span><span class="ref"> (see May 28th, and August 6th, 1915, and December 11th, 1917)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-10-06">October 6</span></p>
<p>Final Austro-German invasion of Serbia begins<span class="ref"> (see December 15th, 1914)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">M. Zaimis</span> appointed <span class="role">Greek Premier</span><span class="ref"> (see 5th, and November 5th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">King of Greece</span> gives assurance to British Minister that Greece will maintain neutrality, but Greek mobilisation<span class="ref"> (see September 23rd)</span> and Allied disembarkation at Salonika will proceed<span class="ref"> (see 3rd, 5th and 8th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-10-07">October 7</span></p>
<p>Austro-German forces effect passage of the Save and Danube<span class="ref"> (see 6th)</span>.</p>
<p>Birjand (East Persia) occupied by British forces<span class="ref"> (see July 29th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-10-08">October 8</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Loos</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see September 25th)</span>.</p>
<p>New Greek Government<span class="ref"> (see 6th)</span> announce policy of armed neutrality.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-10-09">October 9</span></p>
<p>Belgrade taken by Austrian forces<span class="ref"> (see December 15th, 1914, and November 1st, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Second Affair of Hafiz Kor</span> (North-West Frontier of India).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-10-10">October 10</span></p>
<p>Greek Government reject Serbian claim for help under Serbo-Greek Treaty of 1912.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-10-11">October 11</span></p>
<p>Hostilities commence between Bulgarian and Serbian forces<span class="ref"> (see 14th)</span>.</p>
<p>Semendria (Serbia) taken by Austrian forces<span class="ref"> (see 6th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-10-12">October 12</span></p>
<p><span class="person">Miss Edith Cavell</span> shot in Brussels by order of a German court-martial.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-10-13">October 13</span></p>
<p>Most severe airship raid on East Coast of England and London; casualties 200<span class="ref"> (see January 19th and May 31st, 1915, October 19th, 1917, and August 5th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p>Great Britain severs diplomatic relations with Bulgaria<span class="ref"> (see 4th and 15th)</span>.</p>
<p>Hostilities commence between French and Bulgarian forces in Macedonia.</p>
<p><span class="person">M. Delcassé</span> French Foreign Minister, resigns; <span class="person">M. Viviani</span> succeeds temporarily<span class="ref"> (see 29th and 30th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-10-14">October 14</span></p>
<p>Bulgaria and Serbia declare war on one another<span class="ref"> (see 4th and 11th)</span> .</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-10-15">October 15</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Third Battle of Artois</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see September 25th)</span>.</p>
<p>Great Britain declares "state of war" with Bulgaria<span class="ref"> (see 13th)</span>.</p>
<p>Montenegro declares "state of war" with Bulgaria.</p>
<p>Rumanian Government refuse to aid Serbia<span class="ref"> (see January 25th)</span>.</p>
<p>Vranje (Serbia) taken by Bulgarian forces<span class="ref"> (see October 5th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person" content="Sir Charles Monro">General Sir Charles Monro</span> appointed to succeed <span class="person">Sir Ian Hamilton</span> as <span class="role">Commander-in-Chief, Mediterranean Expeditionary Force</span><span class="ref"> (see 17th and 28th, and March 17th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-10-16">October 16</span></p>
<p>France declares "state of war" with Bulgaria<span class="ref"> (see 4th and 15th)</span>.</p>
<p>British Government offer Cyprus to Greece if she will support Serbia<span class="ref"> (see 20th, and January 24th)</span>.</p>
<p>Entente Governments proclaim blockade of Ægean coast of Bulgaria.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-10-17">October 17</span></p>
<p><span class="person" content="Sir William Birdwood">General Sir William Birdwood</span> takes over <span class="role" content="Commander-in-Chief, Mediterranean Expeditionary Force">temporary command of Mediterranean Expeditionary Force</span> from <span class="person">Sir Ian Hamilton</span><span class="ref"> (see 15th and 28th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-10-18">October 18</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Third Battle of the Isonzo</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see November 3rd)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-10-19">October 19</span></p>
<p>Ishtip (Serbia) taken by Bulgarian forces<span class="ref"> (see September 25th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p>Russia and Italy declare war on Bulgaria<span class="ref"> (see 4th and 5th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="polity" content="Japan">Japan</span> declares adherence to the Pact of London<span class="ref"> (see September 5th, 1914, and November 30th, 1915)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-10-20">October 20</span></p>
<p>Greek Government reject British offer of Cyprus<span class="ref"> (see 16th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-10-21">October 21</span></p>
<p>Dede Agatch (Bulgaria) bombarded by Allied squadron.</p>
<p>Veles taken by Bulgarian forces<span class="ref"> (see Septemer 25th, 1918)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-10-22">October 22</span></p>
<p>Kumanovo and Üsküb (Skoplje) taken by Bulgarian forces.</p>
<p>Shabatz taken by Austrian forces.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-10-23">October 23</span></p>
<p>German cruiser "<span class="vessel">Prinz Adalbert</span>" sunk by British submarine "<span class="notation" content="E8">E.-8</span>" in the Baltic.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-10-24">October 24</span></p>
<p>Negotin, on River Vardar, taken by Bulgarian forces.</p>
<p><span class="op">First Action of Krivolak</span> (Macedonia).</p>
<p>British Government in letter to Sherif of Mecca define territorial limits of proposed Arab State<span class="ref"> (see July 14th, 1915, and June 5th, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-10-28">October 28</span></p>
<p>H.M.S. "<span class="vessel">Argyll</span>" wrecked on east coast of Scotland.</p>
<p><span class="person">Lieut.-General Sir Bryan Mahon</span> appointed <span class="role">General Officer Commanding British Forces, Balkans</span><span class="ref"> (see May 9th, 1916)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person" content="Sir Charles Monro">General Sir Charles Monro</span> assumes command of Mediterranean Expeditionary Force<span class="ref"> (see 15th, 17th, and November 4th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-10-29">October 29</span></p>
<p><span class="person">M. Viviani</span>, <span class="role">French Premier</span> and <span class="role" content="French Foreign Minister">Foreign Minister</span>, resigns (date of appointment as Premier June 14th, 1914)<span class="ref"> (see 13th and 30th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">M. Millerand</span>, <span class="role">French Minister for War</span>, resigns<span class="ref"> (see 30th, and August 27th, 1914)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-10-30">October 30</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Third Allied attack on Mora</span> (Cameroons) begins<span class="ref"> (see November 4th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Second Action of Krivolak</span> (Macedonia).</p>
<p><span class="person">M. Briand</span> succeeds <span class="person">M. Viviani</span> as <span class="role">French Premier</span> and <span class="role" content="French Foreign Minister">Foreign Minister</span><span class="ref"> (see 29th, and March 17th, 1917)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">General Galliéni</span> appointed <span class="role">French Minister for War</span><span class="ref"> (see 29th, and March 16th, 1916)</span>.</p>
<p>Last meeting of Dardanelles Committee of the British Cabinet<span class="ref"> (see June 7th and November 3rd)</span>.</p>
</div>

<!-- November 1915 -->

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-11-01">November 1</span></p>
<p>Kragujevatz (North Serbia) taken by Austro-German forces (30th/1st).</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Dvinsk</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see September 9th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-11-02">November 2</span></p>
<p>British Premier (<span class="person">Mr. Asquith</span>) declares Serbian independence to be an essential object of the war.</p>
<p>Kasvin (West Persia) occupied by a Russian force.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-11-03">November 3</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Third Battle of the Isonzo</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see October 18th)</span>.</p>
<p>Serbian Government leave Nish<span class="ref"> (see 23rd, and July 25th, 1914)</span>.</p>
<p>First meeting of newly-constituted War Committee of British Cabinet to replace the Dardanelles Committee<span class="ref"> (see October 30th, 1915, and December 1st, 1916)</span>.</p>
<p>Port and Transit Executive Committee formed in Great Britain<span class="ref"> (see 10th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-11-04">November 4</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Third Allied attack on Mora</span> abandoned<span class="ref"> (see October 30th)</span>.</p>
<p>Banyo (Caineroons) attacked by <span class="person" content="Frederick Hugh Cunliffe">General Cunliffe</span>'s Allied force<span class="ref"> (see 6th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Lord Kitchener</span> leaves England for the <span class="place">Dardanelles</span><span class="ref"> (see 10th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person" content="Sir Charles Monro">General Sir Charles Monro</span> appointed to command Salonika Force.</p>
<p><span class="person">Sir William Birdwood</span> to command Mediterranean Expeditionary Force<span class="ref"> (see 25th, and October 15th, 17th, and 28th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-11-05">November 5</span></p>
<p>Nish taken by Bulgarian forces<span class="ref"> (see 3rd, and October 11th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Kachanik</span> (Serbia) begins<span class="ref"> (see 8th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">M. Zaimis</span>, Greek Prime Minister, resigns<span class="ref"> (see 6th, and October 6th)</span>.</p>
<p>German airship "<span class="notation" content="LZ39">L.Z.-39</span>" destroyed near Grodno.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-11-06">November 6</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Second Battle of Champagne</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see September 25th)</span>.</p>
<p>Sollum (Western Egypt) attacked by German submarine<span class="ref"> (see 14th)</span>. Egyptian coastguard cruiser "<span class="vessel">Abbas</span>" sunk and "<span class="vessel">Nur el Bahr</span>" disabled.</p>
<p>Banyo captured by Allied force<span class="ref"> (see 4th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">M. Skouloudhis</span> appointed <span class="role">Greek Premier</span><span class="ref"> (see 5th, and June 21st, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-11-07">November 7</span></p>
<p>German cruiser "<span class="vessel">Undine</span>" sunk by British submarine "<span class="notation" content="E19">E.-19</span>."</p>
<p>Italian S.S. "<span class="vessel">Ancona</span>" sunk by Austrian submarine.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-11-08">November 8</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Kachanik</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see 5th)</span>.</p>
<p>Entente loan (£1,600,000) to Greece concluded<span class="ref"> (see July 20th, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-11-10">November 10</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Fourth Battle of the Isonzo</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see December 10th)</span>.</p>
<p>Indian Corps begins to leave France for Mesopotamia<span class="ref"> (see October 19th, 1914)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Lord Kitchener</span> arrives at the <span class="place">Dardanelles</span><span class="ref"> (see 4th)</span>.</p>
<p>Ship Licensing Committee formed in Great Britain: Order in Council prohibits voyages between foreign ports except under licence<span class="ref"> (see February 15th, 1916)</span>.</p>
<p>Requisitioning (Carriage of Foodstuffs) Committee formed in Great Britain: Order in Council authorises requisition of ships for carriage of foodstuffs<span class="ref"> (see November 3rd, 1917)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-11-11">November 11</span></p>
<p>First British advance on Baghdad begins<span class="ref"> (see 22nd)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-11-14">November 14</span></p>
<p>Senussi commence hostilities against British by attacking Egyptian post at Sollum<span class="ref"> (see 6th and 23rd)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-11-15">November 15</span></p>
<p>Representatives of Central Powers leave Teheran (Persia) on approach of Russian forces.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-11-16">November 16</span></p>
<p>Babuna Pass and Prilep (South Serbia) taken by Bulgarian forces<span class="ref"> (see September 23rd, 1918)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-11-17">November 17</span></p>
<p>Anglo-French Conference held in Paris to discuss aid to Serbia and <span class="place">Dardanelles</span> expeditions. Project approved in principle to appoint Council of War to co-ordinate Allied action<span class="ref"> (see December 29th)</span>.</p>
<p>British hospital ship "<span class="vessel">Anglia</span>" sunk by mine off Dover.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-11-20">November 20</span></p>
<p>Novi Bazar taken by Austrian forces<span class="ref"> (see October 14th, 1918)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-11-22">November 22</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Battle of Ctesiphon</span> (Mesopotamia) begins<span class="ref"> (see 25th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person" content="Sir H. Smith-Dorrien">General Sir H. Smith-Dorrien</span> appointed <span class="role" content="British Commander-in-Chief in East Africa">Commander-in-Chief of British forces in East Africa</span><span class="ref"> (see January 31st, 1916)</span>. Did not take over command owing to illness.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-11-23">November 23</span></p>
<p>Rovereto (Trentino) taken by Italian forces.</p>
<p>Mitrovitza and Pristina (Serbia) taken by Austro German forces<span class="ref"> (see October 10th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p>Serbian Government leave Prizren for Scutari (Shkodra)<span class="ref"> (see 3rd, and December 3rd)</span>.</p>
<p>British military operations against the Senussi commence<span class="ref"> (see December 13th, 1915, and February 8th, 1917)</span>: Sollum post evacuated<span class="ref"> (see 14th)</span>.</p>
<p>Entente Powers send Note to Greek Government demanding non-interference with Allied troops, and guaranteeing eventual restoration of occupied Greek territory<span class="ref"> (see 24th, and October 3rd)</span>.</p>
<p>British Government conclude preliminary agreement with the Netherlands Overseas Trust for rationing of Holland<span class="ref"> (see June 3rd, 1915, and June 30th, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-11-24">November 24</span></p>
<p>Greek Government accept Entente demands of the 23rd.</p>
<p><span class="person">Field-Marshal von der Goltz</span><span class="ref"> (see December 10th, 1914, and April 19th, 1916)</span> takes command of Turkish forces in Mesopotamia.</p>
<p>Danish merchants and manufacturers conclude agreement with the British Government to restrict supplies to Germany.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-11-25">November 25</span></p>
<p>British retreat from Ctesiphon to Kut al Amara begins<span class="ref"> (see 22nd, and December 3rd)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">M. Albert Thomas</span> announces arrangements completed for inter-Allied organisation of munitions.</p>
<p><span class="person" content="Sir Charles Monro">General Sir Charles Monro</span> appointed Commander-in-Chief reconstituted Mediterranean Expeditionary Force with <span class="person">Sir William Birdwood</span> General Officer Commanding Dardanelles Army<span class="ref"> (see 4th, and January 9th, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-11-29">November 29</span></p>
<p><span class="person">Dr. A. Augusto da Costa</span> succeeds <span class="person">Dr. J. de Castro</span> as <span class="role">Portuguese Premier</span><span class="ref"> (see June 19th, 1915, and March 15th, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-11-30">November 30</span></p>
<p>Serbian retreat through Albania begins<span class="ref"> (see January 15th, 1916)</span>.</p>
<p>Formal signature of the Pact of London by Great Britain, France, Russia, Japan, and Italy<span class="ref"> (see September 5th, 1914; April 26th, 1915; and October 19th, 1915)</span>.</p>
</div>

<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-12-01">December 1</span></p>
<p>Prizren (Serbia) taken by Bulgarian forces<span class="ref"> (see October 11th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p>Italy announces her adherence to the Pact of London<span class="ref"> (see November 30th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-12-02">December 2</span></p>
<p>Monastir (Serbia) taken by Bulgarian forces<span class="ref"> (see November 19th, 1916)</span>.</p>
<p>French retreat from Serbia to Salonika begins: Krivolak evacuated.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-12-03">December 3</span></p>
<p>British forces, retreating from Ctesiphon, reach Kut<span class="ref"> (see 7th, and November 25th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">General Joffre</span>, Chief of French General Staff from July 28th, 1911, appointed Commander-in-Chief French Armies. Appointment of Chief of General Staff lapses<span class="ref"> (see April 29th, 1917)</span>.</p>
<p>Serbian Government and military headquarters set up at Scutari (Shkodra)<span class="ref"> (see November 23rd, 1915, and January 15th, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-12-04">December 4</span></p>
<p>United States Government request recall of German attachés Captains <span class="person">Boy-Ed</span> and <span class="person">Von Papen</span><span class="ref"> (see 10th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-12-05">December 5</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Action of Demir Kapu</span> (5th/6th) in French retreat from Serbia.</p>
<p>Kut placed in state of defence<span class="ref"> (see 3rd and 7th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-12-06">December 6</span></p>
<p>Durazzo bombarded by Austrian squadron<span class="ref"> (see 20th, and August 31st)</span>.</p>
<p>Ipek (Montenegro) taken by Austro-German forces<span class="ref"> (see October 14th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p>British Government put economic pressure on Greece by making the "export restrictions" apply to that country<span class="ref"> (see 13th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-12-07">December 7</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Siege of Kut</span> begins<span class="ref"> (see 3rd, and January 4th and April 29th, 1916)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="op">Actions of Kosturino</span> (7th/8th). British retreat from Macedonia begins.</p>
<p>Agreement concluded between French Government and Netherlands Oversea Trust<span class="ref"> (see November 23rd, 1914, and November 23rd, 1915)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-12-08">December 8</span></p>
<p>Evacuation of Suvla and Anzac ordered<span class="ref"> (see 19th and 20th)</span>.</p>
<p>Debra and Okhrida (Serbia) taken by Bulgarian forces.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-12-09">December 9</span></p>
<p><span class="person">General Castelnau</span> appointed Chief of Staff to <span class="person">General Joffre</span><span class="ref"> (see 3rd)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">General Sarrail</span> demands withdrawal of Greek troops from Salonika<span class="ref"> (see 11th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-12-10">December 10</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Fourth Battle of the Isonzo</span> ends<span class="ref"> (see November 10th)</span>.</p>
<p>German Government recall from United States attachés <span class="person">Von Papen</span> and <span class="person">Boy-Ed</span><span class="ref"> (see 4th, and January 15th, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-12-11">December 11</span></p>
<p>Doiran and Gevgeli (South Serbia) taken by Bulgarian forces<span class="ref"> (see September 22nd, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p>Greek Government refuse Entente demand for withdrawal of Greek troops from Salonika<span class="ref"> (see 9th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person">Yuan-Shih-Kai</span> accepts throne of China<span class="ref"> (see March 22nd, 1916, and June 6th, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-12-13">December 13</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Affair of the Wadi Senab</span> (11th/13th)<span class="ref"> (see November 23rd, 1915, and February 26th, 1916)</span>.</p>
<p>British Government order partial relaxation of economic pressure on Greece<span class="ref"> (see 6th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-12-14">December 14</span></p>
<p>Hamadan (Western Persia) occupied by Russian forces<span class="ref"> (see August 10th, 1916)</span>.</p>
<p>Bulgarian and Greek General Staffs conclude agreement establishing temporary neutral zone along Greek frontier.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-12-15">December 15</span></p>
<p>The last Allied forces in Macedonia withdrawn into Greek territory<span class="ref"> (see 7th, and September 19th, 1916)</span>.</p>
<p>Qasr-i-Shirin (Western Persia) occupied by Turkish forces<span class="ref"> (see May 7th, 1916)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person" content="Sir John French">Field-Marshal Sir John French</span> resigns as <span class="role" content="Commander-in-Chief of the British Armies in France">Commander-in-Chief of British armies in France</span><span class="ref"> (see 19th, and August 4th, 1914, and May 5th, 1918)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-12-17">December 17</span></p>
<p>German light cruiser "<span class="vessel">Bremen</span>" sunk by British submarine in the Baltic.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-12-19">December 19</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Evacuation of Suvla and Anzac</span> begun<span class="ref"> (see 8th and 20th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person" content="Sir Douglas Haig">General Sir Douglas Haig</span> succeeds <span class="person">Sir John French</span> as <span class="role">Commander-in-Chief of the British Armies in France</span><span class="ref"> (see 15th, and January 1st, 1917)</span>.</p>
<p>Bulgarian and Greek General Staffs conclude agreement establishing temporary neutral zone along Greek frontier.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-12-20">December 20</span></p>
<p><span class="op">Evacuation of Suvla and Anzac</span> completed<span class="ref"> (see 8th, 19th and 28th)</span>.</p>
<p>Durazzo occupied by Italian forces<span class="ref"> (see 6th, and February 27th, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-12-22">December 22</span></p>
<p><span class="person" content="Sir William Robertson">LieutGeneral Sir W. Robertson</span> resigns as <span class="role">Chief of the General Staff, British Expeditionary Force, France</span><span class="ref"> (see 23rd, and January 25th)</span>, and is succeeded by <span class="person" content="Launcelot Kiggell">Lieut.-General L. E. Kiggell</span><span class="ref"> (see January 27th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person" content="Archibald Murray">Lieut.-General Sir A. J. Murray</span>, <span class="role" content="Chief of the Imperial General Staff, Great Britain">Chief of the Imperial General Staff</span>, resigns<span class="ref"> (see 23rd, and September 26th, 1915, and March 19th, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-12-23">December 23</span></p>
<p>British naval operations on <span class="place">Lake Tanganyika</span> begin<span class="ref"> (see 26th)</span>.</p>
<p><span class="person" content="Sir William Robertson">General Sir W. Robertson</span> appointed <span class="role" content="Chief of the Imperial General Staff, Great Britain">Chief of the Imperial General Staff</span><span class="ref"> (see 22nd, and February 18th, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p>"Trading with the Enemy (Extension of Powers) Act, 1915" (beginning of "Black List" policy), comes into force in Great Britain<span class="ref"> (see January 26th and July 28th, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-12-24">December 24</span></p>
<p><span class="person">Mustaufi ul Mamalek</span> (<span class="role">Persian Prime Minister</span>) resigns<span class="ref"> (see 25th, and August 18th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-12-25">December 25</span></p>
<p>Turkish Christmas Eve Attack on Kut (24th/25th).</p>
<p><span class="op">Affair of the Wadi Majid</span> (Western Egypt).</p>
<p>Kangavar (Western Persia) occupied by a Russian force. <span class="person">Prince Firman Firma</span> appointed <span class="role">Prime Minister of Persia</span><span class="ref"> (see 24th, and March 5th, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-12-26">December 26</span></p>
<p>German raider "<span class="vessel">Moewe</span>" sails from Bremen on first cruise<span class="ref"> (see February 1st, 1916)</span>.</p>
<p>Naval action on <span class="place">Lake Tanganyika</span>: German gunboat "<span class="vessel">Kingani</span>" captured by H.M.S. "<span class="vessel">Mimi</span>" and "<span class="vessel">Toutou</span>"<span class="ref"> (see 23rd, and February 9th, 1916)</span>.</p>
<p>Treaty concluded between British Government and <span class="person">Ibu Sa'ud</span>, Emir of Nejd<span class="ref"> (see July 18th, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-12-28">December 28</span></p>
<p><span class="op" content="Evacuation of the Gallipoli Peninsula">Evacuation of remainder of Gallipoli Peninsula</span> ordered<span class="ref"> (see 20th, and January 8th, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-12-29">December 29</span></p>
<p>Durazzo raided by Austrian naval light forces: latter brought to action in Southern Adriatic.</p>
<p>Draft rules approved for Inter-Allied Council of War<span class="ref"> (see November 17th)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-12-30">December 30</span></p>
<p>Consuls of Central Powers at Salonika arrested and deported by order of <span class="person">General Sarrail</span>, Commanding French troops.</p>
<p>H.M.S. "<span class="vessel">Natal</span>" destroyed by internal explosion in Cromarty harbour.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p><span class="date" content="1915-12-31">December 31</span></p>
<p>Last units of Indian Expeditionary Force "G" leave the <span class="place">Dardanelles</span> to amalgamate with Indian Expeditionary Force "E" in Egypt<span class="ref"> (see April 7th)</span>.</p>
</div>

</body>
</html>
