<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="-text/html;charset=utf-8"/>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Style-Type" content="-text/css"/>
<title>A Concise Chronicle of Events of The Great War by R. P. P. Rowe.</title>
<style type="text/css" xml:space="preserve">
body {
    margin-left: 10%;
    margin-right: 10%;
}

    h1,h2,h3,h4,h5 {
    text-align: center; /* all headings centered */
    clear: both;
}

p {
    margin-top: .51em;
    text-align: justify;
    margin-bottom: .49em;
}


hr {
    width: 45%;
    margin-top: 2em;
    margin-bottom: 2em;
    margin-left: 27.5%;
    margin-right: 27.5%;
    clear: both;
}

hr.tb   {width: 25%;
         margin-left: 37.5%;
         margin-right: 37.5%;}

hr.chap {width: 45%}


.center   {text-align: center;}

.right   {text-align: right;}

.smcap    {font-variant: small-caps;}

.caption  {font-weight: bold;}

.space-above {   margin-top: 3em; }

.hanging {margin-left: 2em; text-indent: -2em;  }

.sig {   text-align: right;   margin-right: 5%;  }

.date {
	font-weight: bold;
}

[content] {
	background: lightgrey;
}

p.reference {
	margin-left: 2em;
	font-style: italic;
}
p.note {
	font-size: small;
}
.theatre {
	#background: gold;
}
.notation {
	#color: red;
}
.person {
	#color: blue;
}
.vessel {
	#color: Navy;
}
span.ref {
	color: lightgrey;
	#visibility:hidden;
	#display: none;
}
</style>
</head>
<body>
<p class="note" id="N65566">This work derives from:</p>
<p class="reference note" id="N65570">Rowe, R P P. (2015). A Concise Chronicle of Events of the Great War. Urbana, Illinois: Project Gutenberg. Retrieved July, 2023, from www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/48525.</p>
<p class="note" id="N65574">The introduction, appendices, footnotes and page numbers have been removed to leave a simple list of events. An ongoing effort will introduce semantic mark-up into this web page.</p>

<h2>A CONCISE CHRONICLE OF EVENTS OF THE GREAT WAR</h2>
<hr class="chap"/>
<h2><a name="fourteen" id="fourteen">1914</a></h2>

<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-06-28" id="N65591">June 28 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N65596">Assassination of the Archduke Franz Ferdinand, heir to the throne of Austria, at Sarajevo.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-07-23" id="N65599">July 23 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N65604">The Austrian ultimatum to Serbia.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-07-25" id="N65607">July 25 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N65612">Serbia replies, yielding on all points except two. The Austrian Minister leaves Belgrade.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-07-26" id="N65615">July 26 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N65620">The Admiralty countermands orders for the dispersal of the British Fleet.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-07-27" id="N65623">July 27 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N65628">France and Italy accept England's proposal for an international conference.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-07-28" id="N65631">July 28 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N65636">Germany rejects England's proposal for an international conference.</p>
<p id="N65639">Austria declares war on Serbia.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-07-29" id="N65642">July 29 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N65647">First shots of the war: Austria bombards Belgrade.</p>
<p id="N65650">Germany makes proposals to secure England's neutrality.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-07-31" id="N65653">July 31 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N65658">German ultimatums to Russia and France.</p>
<p id="N65661">The French Socialist leader, <span class="person">M. Jaurès</span>, is assassinated in Paris.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-08-01" id="N65664">Aug. 1 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N65669">Germany declares war on Russia.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-08-02" id="N65672">Aug. 2 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N65677">The German army enters Luxemburg. German patrols cross the frontiers of France. Germany invades Poland.</p>
<p id="N65680">The German ultimatum to Belgium.</p>
<p id="N65683">A moratorium is proclaimed in England.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-08-03" id="N65686">Aug. 3 (Mon. Bank Holiday)</p>
<p id="N65691">Germany invades Belgium and declares war on France.</p>
<p id="N65694">Grey's speech in the House of Commons.</p>
<p id="N65697">Italy declares her neutrality.</p>
<p id="N65700">The mobilisation of the British Navy is announced complete.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-08-04" id="N65703">Aug. 4 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N65708">The British Government delivers an ultimatum to Germany, which is summarily rejected. Great Britain declares war on Germany as from 11<small>P.M.</small>on this day.</p>
<p id="N65714"><span class="person">Sir John Jellicoe</span> assumes command of the British Home Fleets.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-08-05" id="N65717">Aug. 5 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N65722">Liége is bombarded by the Germans.</p>
<p id="N65725">Austria declares war on Russia.</p>
<p id="N65728">Montenegro declares war on Austria.</p>
<p id="N65731"><span class="person">Lord Kitchener</span> is appointed Secretary of State for War in Great Britain.</p>
<p id="N65734">The <i><span class="vessel">Königin Luise</span></i>, equipped as a German mine-layer, is sunk by the British Third Destroyer Flotilla (parent ship <i><span class="vessel">Amphion</span></i>) off the Suffolk coast.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-08-06" id="N65743">Aug. 6 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N65748">Fall of three of the forts of Liége.</p>
<p id="N65751">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Amphion</span></i> (light cruiser) is sunk by a mine in the North Sea.</p>
<p id="N65757">The <i><span class="vessel">Goeben</span></i> and the <i><span class="vessel">Breslau</span></i> escape at dusk from Messina and run for the Dardanelles.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-08-07" id="N65766">Aug. 7 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N65771">Fall of Liége; but its northern forts hold out<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 15)</span>.</p>
<p id="N65778">A French reconnaissance into Alsace: Altkirch is captured.</p>
<p id="N65781">The Russians invade East Prussia.</p>
<p id="N65784">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Gloucester</span></i> (light cruiser) attacks and pursues the <i><span class="vessel">Goeben</span></i> and the <i><span class="vessel">Breslau</span></i> in the Mediterranean.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-08-08" id="N65796">Aug. 8 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N65801">The French occupy Mulhausen, in Alsace.</p>
<p id="N65804">A British and French force enters Togoland<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 26)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-08-09" id="N65811">Aug. 9 (Sun.) (Heligoland ceded to Germany in 1890).</p>
<p id="N65816">British troops land in France (disembarkation completed on August 16th).</p>
<p id="N65819">German submarines attack a British light cruiser squadron: the <span class="notation">U15</span> is sunk by the <i><span class="vessel">Birmingham</span></i>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-08-10" id="N65825">Aug. 10 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N65830">France declares war on Austria.</p>
<p id="N65833">The French evacuate Mulhausen, and retire in Alsace, but gain successes in the Vosges.</p>
<p id="N65836">Austria invades Russian Poland.</p>
<p id="N65839">The <i><span class="vessel">Goeben</span></i> and the <i><span class="vessel">Breslau</span></i> reach the Dardanelles.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-08-11" id="N65848">Aug. 11 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N65853">The Belgian army is defeated and falls back before the Germans.</p>
<p id="N65856">A German reverse at Spincourt, in Lorraine.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-08-12" id="N65859">Aug. 12 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N65864">Great Britain declares war on Austria.</p>
<p id="N65867">Serbia invades Bosnia.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-08-13" id="N65870">Aug. 13 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N65875">Austria invades Serbia<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 25)</span>.</p>
<p id="N65882">Dar-es-Salaam (German East Africa) is shelled and raided by the British cruisers <i><span class="vessel">Astræa</span></i> and <i><span class="vessel">Pegasus</span></i>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-08-14" id="N65891">Aug. 14 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N65896">A Russian proclamation guarantees autonomy to Poland.</p>
<p id="N65899">The Russians defeat the Austrians at Sokal.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-08-15" id="N65902">Aug. 15 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N65907">Japan delivers an ultimatum to Germany, demanding the evacuation of Kiao-Chau.</p>
<p id="N65910">The last Liége forts are reduced.</p>
<p id="N65913"><span class="theatre">East Africa</span>:—The Germans occupy Taveta.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-08-16" id="N65919">Aug. 16 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N65924">The disembarkation in France of the original British Expeditionary Force is completed, with <span class="person">Sir John French</span> in supreme command<span class="ref"> (see Dec. 15, 1915)</span>, the First Corps being commanded by <span class="person">Sir D. Haig</span>, the Second Corps by <span class="person">Sir James Grierson</span><span class="ref"> (see Aug. 17)</span>.</p>
<p id="N65935">The Austrians capture Shabatz from the Serbians.</p>
<p id="N65938">The Austrian light cruiser <i><span class="vessel">Zenta</span></i> is sunk during a sweep up the Adriatic by the Allied Fleets.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-08-17" id="N65944">Aug. 17 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N65949">Death of <span class="person">Lieut.-General Sir James Grierson</span>: he is succeeded in command of the British Second Corps by <span class="person">Sir H. Smith-Dorrien</span>.</p>
<p id="N65952">The Germans advance in Belgium: Tirlemont and Louvain are captured. The Belgian Government moves to Antwerp.</p>
<p id="N65955">The Serbians attack on the Jardar (the Battle of the Jardar, which leads to the expulsion of the Austrians from Serbian territory).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-08-18" id="N65958">Aug. 18 (Tues.) Gravelotte, 1870.</p>
<p id="N65963">The French advance in Lorraine culminates in the capture of Saarburg on the Metz-Strasbourg Railway.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-08-19" id="N65966">Aug. 19 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N65971">The Belgians retire on Antwerp.</p>
<p id="N65974"><span class="theatre">Alsace</span>:—Mulhausen is again taken by the French<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 10, 25)</span>.</p>
<p id="N65984">The Battle of the Jardar ends in a complete victory for the Serbians<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 17)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-08-20" id="N65991">Aug. 20 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N65996">The Germans enter Brussels. They bombard Namur.</p>
<p id="N65999">The French retire before a German counter-offensive in Lorraine.</p>
<p id="N66002">A Russian victory at Gumbinnen (East Prussia), which leads to the retirement of the Germans on Königsberg, and to the appointment of Hindenburg to High Command<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 22)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-08-21" id="N66009">Aug. 21 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N66014">The forts of Namur are silenced.</p>
<p id="N66017">The Battle of Charleroi (east of Mons) begins<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 23)</span>.</p>
<p id="N66024"><span class="theatre">South Africa</span>:—German patrols cross into Union territory near Nakob.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-08-22" id="N66030">Aug. 22 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N66035">The French and Belgians are defeated outside Namur.</p>
<p id="N66038">The Germans approach Nancy: the Battle of Nancy<span class="ref"> (see Sept. 11)</span>.</p>
<p id="N66045"><span class="person">General von Hindenburg</span> is appointed to command the German armies in East Prussia.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-08-23" id="N66048">Aug. 23 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N66053">Japan declares war on Germany.</p>
<p id="N66056">Namur is captured by the Germans.</p>
<p id="N66059">The Battle of Mons.</p>
<p id="N66062">The Battle of Charleroi ends in the defeat of the French<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 21)</span>.</p>
<p id="N66069"><span class="theatre">East Prussia</span>:—The Russians are victorious at Frankenau.</p>
<p id="N66075"><span class="theatre">Galicia</span>:—The Russians take Brody and Tarnopol<span class="ref"> (see Sept. 1 and 7, 1915)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-08-24" id="N66085">Aug. 24 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N66090">The retreat of the Allies on the Western Front begins.</p>
<p id="N66093">The Germans occupy Tournai.</p>
<p id="N66096">Cattaro, in the Adriatic, is bombarded by the Allied fleets.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-08-25" id="N66099">Aug. 25 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N66104">Louvain is sacked by the Germans.</p>
<p id="N66107">The British fight severe actions at Landrecies and Maroilles, and reach the line Cambrai—Le Cateau in 'the Retreat.'</p>
<p id="N66110">Mulhausen is again captured by the Germans.</p>
<p id="N66113">In East Prussia the Russians approach Königsberg.</p>
<p id="N66116">The Austrians defeat the Russians in the First Battle of Krasnik.</p>
<p id="N66119">The Austrians evacuate Serbia<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 13)</span>.</p>
<p id="N66126">Invasion of the Cameroons by the French and British<span class="ref"> (see Feb. 19, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-08-26" id="N66133">Aug. 26 (Wed.) (Crécy, 1346).</p>
<p id="N66138">The First Battle of Le Cateau: further retirement of the Allies in France. Maubeuge is invested by the Germans<span class="ref"> (see Sept. 7)</span>.</p>
<p id="N66145">The beginning of the Battle of Tannenberg, which, after four days' fighting, leads to the crushing defeat of the Russians by Hindenburg.</p>
<p id="N66148">Togoland surrenders to the Allies<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 8)</span>.</p>
<p id="N66155">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Highflyer</span></i> (a light cruiser, used before the war as a training ship for naval cadets) sinks the German auxiliary cruiser <i><span class="vessel">Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse</span></i> off the West African coast.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-08-27" id="N66164">Aug. 27 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N66169">The Allies fall back behind the Somme. Lille and Mézières are occupied by the Germans. Ostend is occupied by British marines.</p>
<p id="N66172">Halicz (Galicia) is captured by the Russians.</p>
<p id="N66175">The blockade of Tsingtau (Kiao-Chau) begins<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 15, Nov. 7)</span>.</p>
<p id="N66182">The German cruiser <i><span class="vessel">Magdeburg</span></i> runs ashore in the Gulf of Finland, and is blown up by her captain.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-08-28" id="N66188">Aug. 28 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N66193">The Battle of the Bight of Heligoland: British destroyers supported by light cruisers and battle cruisers sink three German cruisers and two destroyers; no British vessel is lost.</p>
<p id="N66196">New Zealand troops, supported by an Allied naval force, occupy German Samoa.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-08-29" id="N66199">Aug. 29 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N66204">The British Army, in touch at last with the French on both flanks, rests temporarily for the first time in 'the Retreat.' <span class="person">General Joffre</span> and <span class="person">Sir J. French</span> meet and confer at Compiègne. In the evening the retreat is resumed in an orderly manner.</p>
<p id="N66207">The Battle of Tannenberg ends in a complete victory for the Germans<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 26)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-08-30" id="N66214">Aug. 30 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N66219">The British reach a line a little north of Compiègne-Soissons. The Germans occupy La Fère and Laon. The British bases are established temporarily at St. Nazaire and Nantes instead of at Havre and Boulogne.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-08-31" id="N66222">Aug. 31 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N66227">The Germans occupy Amiens.</p>
<p id="N66230">In Galicia the First Battle of Lemberg begins<span class="ref"> (see Sept. 2)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-09-01" id="N66237">Sept. 1 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N66242">The Germans occupy Soissons. The British fight gallant actions at Villers-Cotterets and Néry in 'the Retreat.'</p>
<p id="N66245"><span class="theatre">East Africa</span>:—The first portion of the Expeditionary Force arrives at Mombasa.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-09-02" id="N66251">Sept. 2 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N66256">The British reach the north bank of the Marne in 'the Retreat.'</p>
<p id="N66259">The First Battle of Lemberg ends in a heavy defeat of the Austrians by the Russians<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 31)</span>.</p>
<p id="N66266"><span class="theatre">China</span>:—Japanese troops are landed to attack Tsingtau (Kiao-Chau).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-09-03" id="N66272">Sept. 3 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N66277">The French Government moves to Bordeaux.</p>
<p id="N66280">The British cross the Marne in 'the Retreat,' and blow up the bridges.</p>
<p id="N66283">Lemberg is occupied by the Russians<span class="ref"> (see June 22, 1915)</span>.</p>
<p id="N66290">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Speedy</span></i>, torpedo gunboat, is sunk by a mine off the Humber.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-09-04" id="N66296">Sept. 4 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N66301">The Germans cross the Marne in force.</p>
<p id="N66304">The Russians advance into the Carpathian passes.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-09-05" id="N66307">Sept. 5 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N66312">The Franco-British retreat ends; <span class="person">Joffre</span> orders a counter-offensive. The Germans take Rheims and on their right are close to Paris. Heavy fighting on the Ourcq.</p>
<p id="N66315">The British light cruiser <i><span class="vessel">Pathfinder</span></i> is sunk, with serious loss of life, by a German submarine off St. Abb's Head (the first ship to be sunk by a submarine).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-09-06" id="N66321">Sept. 6 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N66326">The Allied offensive in France begins with the First Battle of the Marne<span class="ref"> (see Sept. 10)</span>. A decisive day in the Battle of Nancy<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 22 and Sept. 11); German attacks are repulsed</span>.</p>
<p id="N66333"><span class="theatre">East Prussia</span>:—The Battle of the Masurian Lakes begins<span class="ref"> (see Sept. 12)</span>.</p>
<p id="N66343">In Galicia, the Battle of Grodek begins<span class="ref"> (see Sept. 13)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-09-07" id="N66350">Sept. 7 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N66355">Maubeuge surrenders to the Germans<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 26)</span>. The Allies press forward in France.</p>
<p id="N66362">The Germans advance into Russia.</p>
<p id="N66365">Austria begins a second invasion of Serbia<span class="ref"> (see Sept. 15)</span>.</p>
<p id="N66372">The formation of the British Royal Naval Division is announced.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-09-08" id="N66375">Sept. 8 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N66380">The advance of the Allies in France continues. Von Kluck is now definitely in retreat.</p>
<p id="N66383">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Oceanic</span></i> (armed merchant cruiser) is wrecked and lost off the Shetland Islands.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-09-09" id="N66389">Sept. 9 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N66394">The decisive day of the Battle of the Marne: the British cross the river and advance north of it; the French carry the Ourcq. Foch makes a decisive move with the 9th French Army.</p>
<p id="N66397"><span class="person">General Botha</span> announces the decision of the South African Government to undertake an expedition against German South-West Africa.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-09-10" id="N66400">Sept. 10 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N66405">The victory of the Marne is complete<span class="ref"> (see Sept. 6)</span>: the Allies advance rapidly.</p>
<p id="N66412"><span class="theatre">Poland</span>:—The Austrians are defeated in the Second Battle of Krasnik.</p>
<p id="N66418">The Serbians occupy Semlin (Hungary).</p>
<p id="N66421">The <i><span class="vessel">Emden</span></i> appears in the Bay of Bengal.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-09-11" id="N66427">Sept. 11 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N66432">The French reoccupy Châlons. The British cross the Ourcq. The Battle of Nancy ends in complete failure by the Germans<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 22)</span>.</p>
<p id="N66435">Australian military and naval forces occupy the Bismarck Archipelago.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-09-12" id="N66438">Sept. 12 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N66443">The Battle of the Masurian Lakes<span class="ref"> (see Sept. 6)</span> ends in the defeat and further retreat of the Russians: East Prussia is cleared of the invader.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-09-13" id="N66446">Sept. 13 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N66451">The Battle of the Aisne begins<span class="ref"> (see Sept. 28)</span>; the British force the passage of the river. Soissons and Amiens are reoccupied by the French.</p>
<p id="N66458"><span class="theatre">Galicia</span>:—The Battle of Grodek<span class="ref"> (see Sept. 6)</span> ends in a complete Russian victory.</p>
<p id="N66468">The German light cruiser <i><span class="vessel">Hela</span></i> is sunk off Heligoland by the British submarine E9 (the first successful submarine attack by the British).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-09-14" id="N66474">Sept. 14 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N66479">High ground north of the Aisne is captured by the British 1st Corps. The Germans evacuate Rheims.</p>
<p id="N66482">In Galicia, the Russians advance across the San.</p>
<p id="N66485">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Carmania</span></i> (auxiliary cruiser) sinks the German auxiliary cruiser <i><span class="vessel">Cap Trafalgar</span></i> off Trinidad after a sharp action.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-09-15" id="N66494">Sept. 15 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N66499">The Russians take Czernowitz, in the Bukovina<span class="ref"> (see Oct. 22)</span>.</p>
<p id="N66506">The Serbians defeat the Austrians on the Drina: this ends the second Austrian invasion of Serbia<span class="ref"> (see Sept. 7)</span>.</p>
<p id="N66513">The rebellion in South Africa begins, but the accidental shooting of De la Rey delays the open outbreak designed and upsets the rebel plans<span class="ref"> (see Oct. 9, 22)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-09-16" id="N66520">Sept. 16 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N66525"><span class="theatre">East Africa</span>:—Longido is occupied by the Germans.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-09-17" id="N66531">Sept. 17 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N66536">The Belgians fall back on Antwerp.</p>
<p id="N66539"><span class="theatre">Hungary</span>:—Semlin is evacuated by the Serbians<span class="ref"> (see Sept. 10)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-09-19" id="N66549">Sept. 19 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N66554">British marines are landed at Dunkirk.</p>
<p id="N66557"><span class="theatre">South-West Africa</span>:—Luderitz Bay is occupied by Union troops.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-09-20" id="N66563">Sept. 20 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N66568">The Germans bombard Rheims Cathedral.</p>
<p id="N66571">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Pegasus</span></i> is sunk by the <i><span class="vessel">Königsberg</span></i> off Zanzibar (95 casualties).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-09-21" id="N66580">Sept. 21 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N66585">The French retake Noyon<span class="ref"> (see Sept. 25)</span>.</p>
<p id="N66592">The German forces advancing from East Prussia reach the Niemen.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-09-22" id="N66595">Sept. 22 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N66600">The Russians invest Przemysl.</p>
<p id="N66603">The Serbians invade Bosnia again<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 12)</span>.</p>
<p id="N66610"><span class="theatre">South Africa</span>:—<span class="person">General Botha</span> assumes command of the Union forces.</p>
<p id="N66616">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Cressy</span></i>, <i><span class="vessel">Aboukir</span></i>, and <i><span class="vessel">Hogue</span></i> (cruisers) are torpedoed by a German submarine off the Hook of Holland: 1400 lives are lost.</p>
<p id="N66628">The <i><span class="vessel">Emden</span></i> shells Madras.</p>
<p id="N66634">A British naval air-raid on Düsseldorf.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-09-23" id="N66637">Sept. 23 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N66642">The Germans capture St. Mihiel.</p>
<p id="N66645">The Russians take Jaroslav (Galicia).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-09-24" id="N66648">Sept. 24 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N66653">The Germans occupy Péronne.</p>
<p id="N66656">Australian forces occupy German New Guinea.</p>
<p id="N66659"><span class="theatre">China</span>:—A British force is landed to aid the Japanese in their operations against Tsingtau.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-09-25" id="N66665">Sept. 25 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N66670">Noyon is retaken by the Germans<span class="ref"> (see Sept. 21)</span>. The Battle of Albert<span class="ref"> (see Sept. 29)</span> begins, the Germans attacking.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-09-26" id="N66681">Sept. 26 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N66686">The Battle of the Niemen<span class="ref"> (see Sept. 28)</span> begins, the Russians standing on the line of the river against the German attack.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-09-27" id="N66693">Sept. 27 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N66698">The Germans fail to cross the Niemen and retire.</p>
<p id="N66701"><span class="theatre">The Cameroons</span>:—Duala surrenders to the Allies.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-09-28" id="N66707">Sept. 28 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N66712">The Germans attack Antwerp.</p>
<p id="N66715">The Battle of the Aisne<span class="ref"> (see Sept. 13)</span> ends in trench warfare.</p>
<p id="N66722">The Battle of the Niemen<span class="ref"> (see Sept. 26)</span> ends in the definite retreat of the Germans.</p>
<p id="N66729">The occupation of Galicia is completed by the Russians, who threaten Cracow and invade Hungary.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-09-29" id="N66732">Sept. 29 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N66737">End of the Battle of Albert<span class="ref"> (see Sept. 25)</span>: the Germans are repulsed.</p>
<p id="N66744">The Battle of Augustovo<span class="ref"> (see Oct. 4)</span> begins: the Russians, having advanced from the Niemen, attack the Germans.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-09-30" id="N66751">Sept. 30 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N66756">The French re-enter Arras and reoccupy Lille.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-10-01" id="N66759">Oct. 1 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N66764">The transfer of the British Army from Champagne to Flanders begins<span class="ref"> (see Oct. 19)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-10-03" id="N66771">Oct. 3 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N66776">The Germans attack from Varennes to Verdun.</p>
<p id="N66779">Before Antwerp the Belgians retire to the line of the Nethe.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-10-04" id="N66782">Oct. 4 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N66787">Lens and Bailleul<span class="ref"> (see Oct. 14)</span> are occupied by the Germans in their movement towards the coast.</p>
<p id="N66794">The end of the Battle of Augustovo<span class="ref"> (see Sept. 29)</span>: the Russians re-enter East Prussia.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-10-05" id="N66797">Oct. 5 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N66802">The British Naval Division reaches Antwerp.</p>
<p id="N66805">The first German advance on Warsaw begins.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-10-06" id="N66808">Oct. 6 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N66813">The British 7th Division is disembarked at Ostend.</p>
<p id="N66816">The British submarine E9 sinks a German destroyer off the mouth of the Ems.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-10-07" id="N66819">Oct. 7 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N66824">The Belgian Government moves from Antwerp to Ostend.</p>
<p id="N66827">Japan occupies the Marshall Islands.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-10-08" id="N66830">Oct. 8 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N66835">The city of Antwerp is bombarded; the garrison retires across the Scheldt. A force of Belgians and 2000 British are driven into Dutch territory.</p>
<p id="N66838">A British air-raid on Cologne and Düsseldorf.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-10-09" id="N66841">Oct. 9 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N66846">The end of the second Russian advance into East Prussia.</p>
<p id="N66849"><span class="theatre">South Africa</span>:—Maritz openly rebels and joins forces with the Germans on the border of South-West Africa<span class="ref"> (see Oct. 22)</span>.</p>
<p id="N66859">A British naval air-raid on Düsseldorf, by which a Zeppelin is destroyed in its shed.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-10-10" id="N66862">Oct. 10 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N66867">Antwerp is captured by the Germans.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-10-11" id="N66870">Oct. 11 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N66875">The Battle of La Bassée begins<span class="ref"> (see Oct. 31)</span>; the British (2nd Corps) attack the La Bassée position.</p>
<p id="N66878">A heavy attack on the British 7th Division at Ghent is repulsed.</p>
<p id="N66881">The Russian cruiser <i><span class="vessel">Pallada</span></i> is destroyed by German submarines in the Baltic.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-10-13" id="N66887">Oct. 13 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N66892">The Germans occupy Ghent and reoccupy Lille; the British (3rd Corps) drive them from Méteren.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-10-14" id="N66895">Oct. 14 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N66900">The British (3rd Corps) recapture Bailleul<span class="ref"> (see Oct. 4)</span>.</p>
<p id="N66907">Jabussi, in the Cameroons, is occupied by the Allies.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-10-15" id="N66910">Oct. 15 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N66915">The Germans occupy Zeebrugge and Ostend. The British (3rd Corps) advance towards the Lys.</p>
<p id="N66918">The First Battle for Warsaw begins<span class="ref"> (see Oct. 27)</span>. The Siege of Przemysl is raised for three weeks.</p>
<p id="N66921"><span class="theatre">South Africa</span>:—Union forces under Colonel Brits attack and defeat the rebel commando under Maritz at Ratedrai.</p>
<p id="N66927">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Hawke</span></i> (cruiser) is torpedoed by a German submarine in the North Sea (500 lives lost).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-10-16" id="N66933">Oct. 16 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N66938">The Battle of the Yser begins<span class="ref"> (see Oct. 30)</span>. The Belgians retire from the Forest of Houthulst.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-10-17" id="N66945">Oct. 17 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N66950">The British (9th Brigade) recapture Aubers.</p>
<p id="N66953">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Undaunted</span></i> (cruiser) and four British destroyers sink four German destroyers off the Dutch coast.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-10-18" id="N66959">Oct. 18 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N66964">British monitors bombard the right flank of the German army in Belgium.</p>
<p id="N66967">The British submarine E3 is sunk in the North Sea (the first British submarine to be lost through enemy action).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-10-19" id="N66970">Oct. 19 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N66975">The transfer of the British to Flanders is completed<span class="ref"> (see Oct. 1)</span>. The First Battle of Ypres begins<span class="ref"> (see Nov. 21)</span>. The first division of Indians reaches the Western Front.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-10-20" id="N66986">Oct. 20 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N66991">The German attack on Arras begins.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-10-22" id="N66994">Oct. 22 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N66999"><span class="theatre">Bukovina</span>:—Czernowitz is reoccupied by the Austrians<span class="ref"> (see Sept. 15, Oct. 27)</span>.</p>
<p id="N67009"><span class="theatre">South Africa</span>:—Beyers, Kemp and De Wet openly rebel<span class="ref"> (see Sept. 15, Oct. 9)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-10-23" id="N67019">Oct. 23 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N67024">French troops support the British at Zonnebeke.</p>
<p id="N67027"><span class="theatre">South-West Africa</span>:—Angola (Portuguese colony) is entered by the Germans.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-10-24" id="N67033">Oct. 24 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N67038">The French advance near Zonnebeke. The Germans cross the Yser.</p>
<p id="N67041"><span class="theatre">South Africa</span>:—De Wet seizes Heilbron.</p>
<p id="N67047">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Badger</span></i> rams a German submarine off the Dutch coast.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-10-26" id="N67053">Oct. 26 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N67058"><span class="theatre">South Africa</span>:—Union troops under Colonel Brits defeat and break up rebel forces under Maritz at Kakamas.</p>
<p id="N67064"><span class="theatre">The Cameroons</span>:—Edea is occupied by the Allies.</p>
<p id="N67070">The French liner <i><span class="vessel">Amiral Ganteaume</span></i> is sunk by a submarine off Cape Grisnez.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-10-27" id="N67076">Oct. 27 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N67081">The British line is drawn back at Ypres.</p>
<p id="N67084">The end of the First Battle for Warsaw<span class="ref"> (see Oct. 15)</span>: the Germans retreat.</p>
<p id="N67091"><span class="theatre">Bukovina</span>:—Czernowitz is reoccupied by the Russians<span class="ref"> (see Oct. 22, 1914; Feb. 17, 1915)</span>.</p>
<p id="N67101">The Serbians are driven out of Bosnia by the Austrians.</p>
<p id="N67104"><span class="theatre">South Africa</span>:—<span class="person">General Botha</span> defeats and disperses Beyers' commando at Commissie Drift, near Rustenburg; Beyers escapes.</p>
<p id="N67110">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Audacious</span></i> (dreadnought) is sunk by a mine off Lough Swilly on the north coast of Ireland.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-10-28" id="N67116">Oct. 28 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N67121">The Belgians flood the land round the Yser.</p>
<p id="N67124">The <i><span class="vessel">Emden</span></i> sinks the Russian cruiser <i><span class="vessel">Jemchug</span></i> and the French destroyer <i><span class="vessel">Mousquet</span></i> off Penang.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-10-29" id="N67136">Oct. 29 (Thurs.)</p>
<p id="N67141">Lord Fisher succeeds <span class="person">Prince Louis of Battenberg</span> as British First Sea Lord<span class="ref"> (see May 28, 1915)</span>.</p>
<p id="N67144">Fierce fighting round Kruseik and Gheluvelt.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-10-30" id="N67147">Oct. 30 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N67152">The Germans are forced back by the floods in the Yser district: the end of the Battle of the Yser<span class="ref"> (see Oct. 16)</span>. The British are driven from Zandvoorde but hold at Klein Zillebeke.</p>
<p id="N67159"><span class="theatre">South Africa</span>:—Colonel Brits clears the north-west of Cape Province by defeating the remnant of the rebels left in this locality at Schuit Drift.</p>
<p id="N67165">The German cruiser <i><span class="vessel">Königsberg</span></i> is discovered in the Rufiji River (German East Africa) and shelled by H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Chatham</span></i> and other British warships<span class="ref"> (see July 11, 1915)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-10-31" id="N67178">Oct. 31 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N67183">The end of the Battle of La Bassée<span class="ref"> (see Oct. 11)</span>.</p>
<p id="N67186">A critical day in the First Battle of Ypres; the British line is broken and restored.</p>
<p id="N67189">Tsingtau is bombarded by the Japanese and British<span class="ref"> (see Nov. 7)</span>.</p>
<p id="N67196">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Hermes</span></i> (aircraft-carrier) is sunk by a submarine in the Straits of Dover.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-11-01" id="N67202">Nov. 1 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N67207">The Germans take Messines.</p>
<p id="N67210">The third Austrian invasion of Serbia begins<span class="ref"> (see Dec. 15)</span>.</p>
<p id="N67217">The forts of Tsingtau are silenced<span class="ref"> (see Nov. 7)</span>.</p>
<p id="N67224">A British squadron is defeated off Coronel (Chile) by a German squadron of superior strength under <span class="person">Admiral von Spee</span>: the <i><span class="vessel">Good Hope</span></i> and <i><span class="vessel">Monmouth</span></i> are sunk.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-11-02" id="N67233">Nov. 2 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N67238">The Germans capture Neuve Chapelle from the British.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-11-03" id="N67241">Nov. 3 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N67246">The Dardanelles Forts are bombarded by the British and French Mediterranean fleets.</p>
<p id="N67249"><span class="theatre">East Africa</span>:—Tanga is attacked by the British<span class="ref"> (see Nov. 5)</span>.</p>
<p id="N67259">A German cruiser squadron bombards Yarmouth and escapes.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-11-04" id="N67262">Nov. 4 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N67267">The Austrians are heavily defeated at Jaroslav (Galicia).</p>
<p id="N67270"><span class="theatre">East Africa</span>:—A British attack on Longido is repulsed.</p>
<p id="N67276">The German armoured cruiser <i><span class="vessel">Yorck</span></i> is sunk by a mine at the entrance to Jahde Bay (west of the mouth of the Weser).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-11-05" id="N67282">Nov. 5 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N67287">Great Britain declares war on Turkey and annexes Cyprus.</p>
<p id="N67290">The British line at Ypres is readjusted.</p>
<p id="N67293"><span class="theatre">East Africa</span>:—The British attack on Tanga is repulsed<span class="ref"> (see Nov. 3)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-11-06" id="N67303">Nov. 6 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N67308">Carl Lody is shot for espionage in the Tower of London.</p>
<p id="N67311">The Germans attack at Klein Zillebeke.</p>
<p id="N67314"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—Fao, at the mouth of the Shatt-el-Arab, is captured by the British.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-11-07" id="N67320">Nov. 7 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N67325">Tsingtau is taken by the Japanese and British<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 27, Oct. 31)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-11-09" id="N67332">Nov. 9 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N67337">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Sydney</span></i> of the Australian navy destroys the <i><span class="vessel">Emden</span></i> off Cocos Island.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-11-10" id="N67346">Nov. 10 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N67351">The Germans capture Dixmude.</p>
<p id="N67354">Goldap (East Prussia) is occupied by the Russians.</p>
<p id="N67357">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Chatham</span></i> and other British warships again shell the <i><span class="vessel">Königsberg</span></i> in the Rufiji River (German East Africa)<span class="ref"> (see Oct. 30 and July 11, 1915)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-11-11" id="N67366">Nov. 11 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N67371">A critical day in the First Battle of Ypres: a great attack by the Prussian Guard is repulsed.</p>
<p id="N67374">The Russians begin the Second Siege of Przemysl<span class="ref"> (see March 22, 1915)</span>.</p>
<p id="N67381">The British torpedo-gunboat <i><span class="vessel">Niger</span></i> is sunk by a German submarine off Deal.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-11-12" id="N67387">Nov. 12 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N67392">A fresh German assault on the Klein Zillebeke position is partially successful.</p>
<p id="N67395"><span class="theatre">South Africa</span>:—<span class="person">Botha</span> completely routs the rebel forces under De Wet at Mushroom Valley in the Orange Free State.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-11-14" id="N67401">Nov. 14 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N67406">Death of <span class="person">Lord Roberts</span> at British G.H.Q. in France (St. Omer).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-11-15" id="N67409">Nov. 15 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N67414">The Russians advance rapidly in East Prussia.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-11-17" id="N67417">Nov. 17 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N67422"><span class="theatre">South-West Africa</span>:—The Germans again invade Angola<span class="ref"> (see Oct. 23)</span>.</p>
<p id="N67432"><span class="theatre">East Africa</span>:—Longido is occupied by the British.</p>
<p id="N67438">Libau is shelled by a German squadron.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-11-18" id="N67441">Nov. 18 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N67446">The Second Battle for Warsaw begins<span class="ref"> (see Dec. 28)</span>.</p>
<p id="N67453">The <i><span class="vessel">Goeben</span></i> and the <i><span class="vessel">Breslau</span></i> are attacked by a Russian squadron in the Black Sea, the <i><span class="vessel">Goeben</span></i> being damaged.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-11-20" id="N67465">Nov. 20 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N67470">The Germans invade Uganda.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-11-21" id="N67473">Nov. 21 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N67478">The end of the First Battle of Ypres<span class="ref"> (see Oct. 19)</span>.</p>
<p id="N67485">Basra, at the head of the Persian Gulf, is occupied by British forces from India.</p>
<p id="N67488">A British air-raid on the Zeppelin sheds at Friedrichshafen.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-11-23" id="N67491">Nov. 23 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N67496">The Germans attack the Indians at Festubert; trenches are lost and recovered.</p>
<p id="N67499">The Russian front is broken near Lodz.</p>
<p id="N67502">Zeebrugge is bombarded by two British battleships.</p>
<p id="N67505">The German submarine <span class="notation">U18</span> is rammed and sunk off the north coast of Scotland.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-11-24" id="N67508">Nov. 24 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N67513">The Russian line near Lodz is restored.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-11-25" id="N67516">Nov. 25 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N67521"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—A naval reconnaissance up the Tigris to Gurneh.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-11-26" id="N67527">Nov. 26 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N67532">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Bulwark</span></i> (battleship) is destroyed by an accidental explosion off Sheerness with heavy loss of life.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-11-27" id="N67538">Nov. 27 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N67543">The Russians begin to evacuate Lodz.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-12-01" id="N67546">Dec. 1 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N67551"><span class="theatre">South Africa</span>:—De Wet is captured by Union troops at Waterburg (100 miles west of Mafeking)<span class="ref"> (see Oct. 22)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-12-02" id="N67561">Dec. 2 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N67566">A French success at Vermelles.</p>
<p id="N67569">Belgrade is occupied by the Austrians.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-12-03" id="N67572">Dec. 3 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N67577">The Battle of the Ridges, between the Serbians and the Austrians, begins<span class="ref"> (see Dec. 6)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-12-04" id="N67584">Dec. 4 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N67589"><span class="theatre">South Africa</span>:—Part of the rebel forces surrenders near Reitz.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-12-06" id="N67595">Dec. 6 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N67600">The Battle at Lodz<span class="ref"> (see Nov. 23, 24 and 27)</span> ends in the capture of the town by the Germans.</p>
<p id="N67607">The Battle of the Ridges<span class="ref"> (see Dec. 3)</span> ends in the rout of the Austrians.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-12-07" id="N67614">Dec. 7 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N67619">The Russians attack the forts of Cracow.</p>
<p id="N67622"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—A British success at Mezera.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-12-08" id="N67628">Dec. 8 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N67633">The Battle of the Falkland Islands: a German squadron under <span class="person">Admiral von Spee</span> is destroyed by a British cruiser force under <span class="person">Admiral Sir F. Doveton Sturdee</span>; only the <i><span class="vessel">Dresden</span></i> escapes.</p>
<p id="N67639"><span class="theatre">South Africa</span>:—<span class="person">General Beyers</span>, after a crushing defeat south of Bothaville, is drowned in attempting to escape across the Vaal River. The main rebel force surrenders to <span class="person">General Botha</span><span class="ref"> (see Oct. 22)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-12-10" id="N67649">Dec. 10 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N67654"><span class="theatre">The Cameroons</span>:—Bare is occupied by the British.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-12-11" id="N67660">Dec. 11 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N67665">The <i><span class="vessel">Goeben</span></i> is driven from Batum.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-12-12" id="N67671">Dec. 12 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N67676">The Austrians take the Dukla Pass. The Russians are forced to retreat from Cracow.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-12-13" id="N67679">Dec. 13 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N67684">The British submarine <span class="notation">B11</span> passes under the Dardanelles mine-fields and sinks the Turkish battleship <i><span class="vessel">Messudiyeh</span></i>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-12-15" id="N67690">Dec. 15 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N67695">The end of the third Austrian invasion of Serbia: the Serbians retake Belgrade and again drive the Austrians out of the country<span class="ref"> (see Nov. 1)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-12-16" id="N67702">Dec. 16 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N67707">German cruisers bombard Scarborough, Hartlepool, and Whitby.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-12-18" id="N67710">Dec. 18 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N67715">The Khedive of Egypt, Abbas II., is deposed, and <span class="person">Prince Hussein Kamel Pasha</span>, a son of the ex-Khedive Ismail, is appointed Sultan of Egypt by Great Britain<span class="ref"> (see Oct. 9, 1917)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-12-19" id="N67722">Dec. 19 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N67727">An attack by the Indian Corps at Givenchy: ground is gained and lost.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-12-20" id="N67730">Dec. 20 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N67735">The Germans capture Indian positions near Givenchy.</p>
<p id="N67738">The Russians recapture the Dukla Pass and advance in the Carpathians.</p>
<p id="N67741">A British air-raid on Brussels airship sheds.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-12-22" id="N67744">Dec. 22 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N67749">The situation near Givenchy is restored by a British counter-attack.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-12-24" id="N67752">Dec. 24 (Thurs.)</p>
<p id="N67757">A British air-raid on the German airship sheds near Brussels.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-12-25" id="N67760">Dec. 25 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N67765">German warships are bombed by British seaplanes off Cuxhaven.</p>
<p id="N67768"><span class="theatre">South-West Africa</span>:—Walfish Bay is occupied by Union troops.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-12-26" id="N67774">Dec. 26 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N67779">Valona (Albania) is temporarily occupied by the Italians<span class="ref"> (see May 29, 1915)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-12-28" id="N67786">Dec. 28 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N67791">The Second Battle for Warsaw<span class="ref"> (see Nov. 18)</span> ends in failure for the Germans.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-12-29" id="N67798">Dec. 29 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N67803"><span class="theatre">The Caucasus</span>:—The Battle of Sarykamish begins, between the Russians and the Turks<span class="ref"> (see Jan. 2, 1915)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1914-12-30" id="N67813">Dec. 30 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N67818">A raid by German aeroplanes on Dunkirk.</p>
</div>

<hr class="chap"/>
<h2><a name="fifteen" id="fifteen">1915</a></h2>

<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-01-01" id="N67831">Jan. 1 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N67836">A new British decoration, the 'Military Cross,' is instituted.</p>
<p id="N67839"><span class="theatre">The Caucasus</span>:—Ardahan is occupied by the Turks.</p>
<p id="N67845">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Formidable</span></i> (battleship) is torpedoed in the English Channel (600 lives lost).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-01-02" id="N67851">Jan. 2 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N67856"><span class="theatre">The Caucasus</span>:—The end of the Battle of Sarykamish<span class="ref"> (see Dec. 29, 1914)</span>: the Turks are routed.</p>
<p id="N67866"><span class="theatre">East Africa</span>:—Jassin is occupied by the British<span class="ref"> (see Jan. 19)</span>.</p>
<p id="N67876">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Fox</span></i> and H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Goliath</span></i> bombard Dar-es-Salaam (German East Africa).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-01-03" id="N67885">Jan. 3 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N67890"><span class="theatre">The Caucasus</span>:—Ardahan is reoccupied by the Russians.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-01-04" id="N67896">Jan. 4 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N67901">A Russian advance in the Bukovina begins.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-01-07" id="N67904">Jan. 7 (Thurs.)</p>
<p id="N67909"><span class="theatre">The Cameroons</span>:—A German attack on Edea is repulsed.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-01-08" id="N67915">Jan. 8 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N67920">The Battle of Soissons begins<span class="ref"> (see Jan. 14)</span>: the French advance.</p>
<p id="N67927"><span class="theatre">The Caucasus</span>:—The Battle of Kara Urgan begins<span class="ref"> (see Jan. 13)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-01-09" id="N67937">Jan. 9 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N67942"><span class="theatre">Northern Persia</span>:—The Turks capture Tabriz from the Russians<span class="ref"> (see Jan. 30)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-01-11" id="N67952">Jan. 11 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N67957">A German counter-attack at Soissons is repulsed.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-01-12" id="N67960">Jan. 12 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N67965"><span class="theatre">East Africa</span>:—The Island of Mafia surrenders to the British.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-01-13" id="N67971">Jan. 13 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N67976"><span class="theatre">Caucasus</span>:—The Battle of Kara Urgan ends in a Turkish defeat<span class="ref"> (see Jan. 8)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-01-14" id="N67986">Jan. 14 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N67991">The French fall back on Soissons: the end of the Battle of Soissons<span class="ref"> (see Jan. 8)</span>.</p>
<p id="N67998"><span class="theatre">South-West Africa</span>:—Swakopmund is occupied by Union forces.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-01-19" id="N68004">Jan. 19 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N68009">The Austrian army enters Galicia.</p>
<p id="N68012"><span class="theatre">East Africa</span>:—Jassin is captured by the Germans<span class="ref"> (see Jan. 2)</span>.</p>
<p id="N68022">A Zeppelin raid on Yarmouth, Cromer and King's Lynn.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-01-21" id="N68025">Jan. 21 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N68030">The Germans capture the Hartmannsweilerkopf (Alsace).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-01-22" id="N68033">Jan. 22 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N68038">A British air-raid on Zeebrugge.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-01-24" id="N68041">Jan. 24 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N68046"><span class="theatre">South Africa</span>:—The rebels under Maritz and Kemp are repulsed with heavy loss at Upington.</p>
<p id="N68052">The Battle of the Dogger Bank: Beatty's squadron destroys the <i><span class="vessel">Blücher</span></i> and damages other German warships.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-01-25" id="N68058">Jan. 25 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N68063">German attacks are repulsed at Cuinchy and near Givenchy.</p>
<p id="N68066">The German light cruiser <i><span class="vessel">Gazelle</span></i> is torpedoed in the Baltic.</p>
<p id="N68072">The Russians destroy a German airship over Libau.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-01-26" id="N68075">Jan. 26 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N68080">The Turks advance on Egypt from Palestine.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-01-29" id="N68083">Jan. 29 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N68088">The Turks occupy Katiyeh, near the Suez Canal.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-01-30" id="N68091">Jan. 30 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N68096"><span class="theatre">Northern Persia</span>:—The Russians reoccupy Tabriz<span class="ref"> (see Jan. 9)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-01-31" id="N68106">Jan. 31 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N68111">Farsan Island (Red Sea) is occupied by Arab forces.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-02-01" id="N68114">Feb. 1 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N68119">The British hospital ship <i><span class="vessel">Asturias</span></i> is attacked near Havre by a German submarine.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-02-02" id="N68125">Feb. 2 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N68130">The first Turkish attack on the Suez Canal.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-02-03" id="N68133">Feb. 3 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N68138">The Turks are repulsed on the Suez Canal.</p>
<p id="N68141"><span class="theatre">South Africa</span>:—Kemp, the last rebel leader, surrenders unconditionally; this ends the rebellion<span class="ref"> (see Oct. 22, 1914)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-02-04" id="N68151">Feb. 4 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N68156">The British cross the Suez Canal and pursue the Turks.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-02-06" id="N68159">Feb. 6 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N68164">The Russians again advance in East Prussia.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-02-07" id="N68167">Feb. 7 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N68172">The Russians retire before a German advance in East Prussia, and are driven back by the Austrians in the Bukovina.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-02-08" id="N68175">Feb. 8 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N68180"><span class="theatre">South-West Africa</span>:—<span class="person">General Botha</span> sails for Walfish Bay<span class="ref"> (see July 9, 1915)</span>.</p>
<p id="N68190">French airmen bombard Ostend.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-02-11" id="N68193">Feb. 11 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N68198">A British air-raid on Zeebrugge.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-02-12" id="N68201">Feb. 12 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N68206">The Germans invade Russia and take Miriampol.</p>
<p id="N68209">The Austrians advance in the Carpathians.</p>
<p id="N68212">Aden Protectorate is invaded by the Turks.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-02-14" id="N68215">Feb. 14 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N68220">The Germans capture Lyck and again clear East Prussia.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-02-15" id="N68223">Feb. 15 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N68228">Mutiny of the 5th Light Infantry at Singapore.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-02-16" id="N68231">Feb. 16 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N68236">The Austrians capture Kolomea (Bukovina).</p>
<p id="N68239">A British naval air-raid on Zeebrugge.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-02-17" id="N68242">Feb. 17 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N68247">Czernowitz is recaptured by the Austrians<span class="ref"> (see Oct. 27, 1914)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-02-18" id="N68254">Feb. 18 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N68259">The declaration by Germany of a submarine blockade round the British Isles comes into force.</p>
<p id="N68262">The end of the German advance into Russia.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-02-19" id="N68265">Feb. 19 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N68270">The Austrians drive the Russians out of Stanislau<span class="ref"> (see March 4)</span>.</p>
<p id="N68277">A naval attack on the Dardanelles begins: the outer forts are bombarded until the 23rd.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-02-21" id="N68280">Feb. 21 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N68285">A Zeppelin raid on Calais.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-02-22" id="N68288">Feb. 22 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N68293">The Germans advance on Przasnysz (the Battle of Przasnysz).</p>
<p id="N68296">The Turks are driven from Akaba (Red Sea).</p>
<p id="N68299"><span class="theatre">South-West Africa</span>:—Garub is occupied by Union troops.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-02-24" id="N68305">Feb. 24 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N68310">The Germans capture Przasnysz<span class="ref"> (see Feb. 27)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-02-25" id="N68317">Feb. 25 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N68322">The bombardment of the Dardanelles forts is resumed; the <i><span class="vessel">Queen Elizabeth</span></i> comes into action.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-02-26" id="N68328">Feb. 26 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N68333">The entrance to the Dardanelles is swept clear of mines.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-02-27" id="N68336">Feb. 27 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N68341">Przasnysz is reoccupied by the Russians<span class="ref"> (see Feb. 24 and July 14)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-02-28" id="N68348">Feb. 28 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N68353">A German retreat from North Poland begins.</p>
<p id="N68356">A German submarine is rammed by the <i><span class="vessel">Thordis</span></i> off Beachy Head (the first case of a submarine being rammed by a merchant ship).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-03-03" id="N68362">Mar. 3 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N68367"><span class="theatre">South-West Africa</span>:—Makob is occupied by Union forces.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-03-04" id="N68373">Mar. 4 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N68378">Stanislau is recaptured by the Russians<span class="ref"> (see Feb. 19)</span>.</p>
<p id="N68385">The Dardanelles forts are bombarded from inside the Straits.</p>
<p id="N68388">The German submarine <span class="notation">U8</span> is sunk by British destroyers near Dover.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-03-05" id="N68391">Mar. 5 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N68396">The Allies bombard Smyrna.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-03-06" id="N68399">Mar. 6 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N68404">Another great attack on the Dardanelles forts.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-03-07" id="N68407">Mar. 7 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N68412">Lemnos, in the Ægean Sea, is occupied by the British.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-03-08" id="N68415">Mar. 8 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N68420">The British Government announces that a separate treatment will be meted out to prisoners captured in German submarines<span class="ref"> (see April 12 and June 12)</span>.</p>
<p id="N68427">Heavy fighting near Augustovo: the Russians drive the Germans back to the frontier.</p>
<p id="N68430">A British air-raid on Ostend.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-03-09" id="N68433">Mar. 9 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N68438"><span class="theatre">East Africa</span>:—The British defeat the Germans on the Mora River.</p>
<p id="N68444">The German submarine <span class="notation">U12</span> is rammed and sunk by the British destroyer <i><span class="vessel">Ariel</span></i> off the Firth of Forth.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-03-10" id="N68450">Mar. 10 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N68455">The Battle of Neuve Chapelle begins: the British advance<span class="ref"> (see March 13)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-03-11" id="N68462">Mar. 11 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N68467"><span class="theatre">South-West Africa</span>:—Nabas is occupied by Union forces.</p>
<p id="N68473">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Bayano</span></i> (armed merchant cruiser) is sunk by a submarine off the Clyde.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-03-13" id="N68479">Mar. 13 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N68484">The Battle of Neuve Chapelle ends: the British gains are consolidated<span class="ref"> (see March 10)</span>.</p>
<p id="N68491">The Russians breach the defences of Przemysl.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-03-14" id="N68494">Mar. 14 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N68499">The Germans attack at St. Eloi and take the village.</p>
<p id="N68502">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Kent</span></i> and H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Glasgow</span></i> sink the <i><span class="vessel">Dresden</span></i> off Juan Fernandez Island.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-03-15" id="N68514">Mar. 15 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N68519">The British retake St. Eloi.</p>
<p id="N68522">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Amethyst</span></i> makes a raid up the Dardanelles.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-03-17" id="N68528">Mar. 17 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N68533">A further enemy attack at St. Eloi is repulsed.</p>
<p id="N68536"><span class="person">Sir Ian Hamilton</span> arrives at Tenedos (Ægean Sea).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-03-18" id="N68539">Mar. 18 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N68544">The Battle of the Narrows: an Allied naval attack on the Dardanelles is repulsed; the French battleship <i><span class="vessel">Bouvet</span></i> and the British battleships <i><span class="vessel">Irresistible</span></i> and <i><span class="vessel">Ocean</span></i> are sunk.</p>
<p id="N68556">The Russians again invade East Prussia and temporarily occupy Memel<span class="ref"> (see March 21)</span>.</p>
<p id="N68563">A Zeppelin raid on Calais.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-03-20" id="N68566">Mar. 20 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N68571"><span class="theatre">South-West Africa</span>:—<span class="person">General Botha</span> defeats the Germans at Riet on the Swakop.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-03-21" id="N68577">Mar. 21 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N68582">The Germans retake Memel<span class="ref"> (see March 18)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-03-22" id="N68589">Mar. 22 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N68594">Przemysl surrenders to the Russians, who claim 126,000 prisoners<span class="ref"> (see Nov. 11, 1914, and June 3, 1915)</span>.</p>
<p id="N68597">A second Turkish attack on the Suez Canal.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-03-23" id="N68600">Mar. 23 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N68605">The Turks are again driven back from the Suez Canal.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-03-24" id="N68608">Mar. 24 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N68613">A British air-raid on German submarine works at Hoboken, near Antwerp.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-03-25" id="N68616">Mar. 25 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N68621">The French attack the Hartmannsweilerkopf (Alsace).</p>
<p id="N68624">The Dutch steamship <i><span class="vessel">Medea</span></i> is sunk by a German submarine off Beachy Head.</p>
<p id="N68630">The German fleet bombards the coast of Courland.</p>
<p id="N68633">A French air-raid on Metz.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-03-27" id="N68636">Mar. 27 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N68641">The French capture the Hartmannsweilerkopf (Alsace).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-03-28" id="N68644">Mar. 28 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N68649">The British liner <i><span class="vessel">Falaba</span></i> is sunk by the <span class="notation">U28</span> south of St. George's Channel.</p>
<p id="N68655">Libau is bombarded by German warships.</p>
<p id="N68658">A German air-raid on Calais.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-04-01" id="N68661">April 1 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N68666"><span class="theatre">South-West Africa</span>:—Union forces seize Hasuur.</p>
<p id="N68672">A British air-raid on Hoboken and Zeebrugge.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-04-04" id="N68675">April 4 (Easter Sunday)</p>
<p id="N68680"><span class="theatre">South-West Africa</span>:—Warmbad is occupied by Union forces.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-04-05" id="N68686">April 5 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N68691">The French attack at Les Eparges.</p>
<p id="N68694"><span class="theatre">Caucasus</span>:—Artvin is occupied by the Russians.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-04-06" id="N68700">April 6 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N68705">A German counter-attack at Les Eparges.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-04-08" id="N68708">April 8 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N68713">The French win the summit of Les Eparges.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-04-09" id="N68716">April 9 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N68721">A final German counter-attack at Les Eparges is repulsed.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-04-12" id="N68724">April 12 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N68729">Germany places 39 British officers in detention barracks as a reprisal against the treatment of submarine prisoners by Great Britain<span class="ref"> (see March 8 and June 12)</span>.</p>
<p id="N68732"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—The British are attacked at Shaiba.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-04-14" id="N68738">April 14 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N68743"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—The Battle at Shaiba ends in the defeat of the Turks.</p>
<p id="N68749">A Zeppelin raid on the Tyneside.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-04-15" id="N68752">April 15 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N68757">A Zeppelin raid on East Anglia.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-04-16" id="N68760">April 16 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N68765"><span class="theatre">Northern Persia</span>:—Urmia is occupied by the Turks.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-04-17" id="N68771">April 17 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N68776">The British capture 'Hill 60,' near Ypres.</p>
<p id="N68779"><span class="theatre">South West Africa</span>:—Seeheim is occupied by Union forces.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-04-18" id="N68785">April 18 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N68790">The Germans counter-attack on 'Hill 60' and regain part of it.</p>
<p id="N68793">On the North-West Frontier of India Mohmand Inshkar is defeated by the British.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-04-20" id="N68796">April 20 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N68801">Fierce fighting on 'Hill 60.' The Germans bombard Ypres.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-04-21" id="N68804">April 21 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N68809">The Germans are driven from 'Hill 60'<span class="ref"> (see May 5)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-04-22" id="N68816">April 22 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N68821">The Second Battle of Ypres<span class="ref"> (see May 24)</span> begins; poison gas is used by the Germans for the first time; the Canadians suffer heavily.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-04-24" id="N68828">April 24 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N68833">A second German gas attack; the Germans storm St. Julien.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-04-25" id="N68836">April 25 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N68841"><span class="theatre">Alsace</span>:—The French lose ground on the Hartmannsweilerkopf.</p>
<p id="N68847">April 25-26 (Sun.-Mon.)</p>
<p id="N68850">The Allies land in Gallipoli (the Battle of Cape Helles).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-04-27" id="N68853">April 27 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N68858">The Baltic Provinces are invaded by the Germans.</p>
<p id="N68861">The British positions in Gallipoli are consolidated.</p>
<p id="N68864">The French armoured cruiser <i><span class="vessel">Leon Gambetta</span></i> is torpedoed and sunk at the entrance of the Straits of Otranto (night of 26-27).</p>
<p id="N68870">The British submarine E14 enters the Sea of Marmora.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-04-28" id="N68873">April 28 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N68878">The German offensive is held at Ypres.</p>
<p id="N68881"><span class="theatre">Alsace</span>:—The French retake the Hartmannsweilerkopf, the summit of which had been lost on the 25th.</p>
<p id="N68887"><span class="theatre">Gallipoli</span>:—The First Battle for Krithia: the Allies are repulsed.</p>
<p id="N68893">An unsuccessful Turkish attack on the Suez Canal (the third).</p>
<p id="N68896"><span class="theatre">South-West Africa</span>:—The Germans are defeated at Gibeon.</p>
<p id="N68902">French airmen raid Friedrichshafen.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-04-29" id="N68905">April 29 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N68910">A Turkish transport is sunk by the E14 in the Sea of Marmora.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-04-30" id="N68913">April 30 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N68918">A Zeppelin raid on East Anglia.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-05-01" id="N68921">May 1 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N68926">The great Austro-German offensive in Western Galicia begins. In the Baltic Provinces the Germans occupy Shavli and approach Libau.</p>
<p id="N68929">The Turks attack in Gallipoli.</p>
<p id="N68932">The British destroyer <i><span class="vessel">Recruit</span></i> is sunk by a submarine off the Galloper lightship. Two German torpedo boats are sunk by British destroyers in the North Sea.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-05-02" id="N68938">May 2 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N68943">A German gas attack at Ypres is repulsed.</p>
<p id="N68946">The Austro-Germans cross the Biala; Ciezkowice is taken.</p>
<p id="N68949">The British counter-attack in Gallipoli.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-05-03" id="N68952">May 3 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N68957">The British line at Ypres is shortened.</p>
<p id="N68960">The Germans advance on the Eastern Front.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-05-04" id="N68963">May 4 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N68968"><span class="theatre">Gallipoli</span>:—The British fail in an attack at Gaba Tepe.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-05-05" id="N68974">May 5 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N68979">The Germans recapture 'Hill 60'<span class="ref"> (see Apr. 21)</span>.</p>
<p id="N68986"><span class="theatre">South-West Africa</span>:—Union forces occupy Karibib.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-05-06" id="N68992">May 6 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N68997"><span class="theatre">Gallipoli</span>:—The Second Battle for Krithia begins<span class="ref"> (see May 8)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-05-07" id="N69007">May 7 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N69012">The <i><span class="vessel">Lusitania</span></i> is torpedoed by a German submarine off the Old Head of Kinsale; 1198 lives are lost (including 124 Americans).</p>
<p id="N69018">The British destroyer <i><span class="vessel">Maori</span></i> is sunk by a mine in the North Sea.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-05-08" id="N69024">May 8 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N69029">A fierce German attack at Ypres.</p>
<p id="N69032">The Russians are defeated in Galicia and in the Baltic Provinces. Libau is captured by the Germans.</p>
<p id="N69035"><span class="theatre">Gallipoli</span>:—The Second Battle for Krithia<span class="ref"> (see May 6)</span> ends in a slight Allied advance.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-05-09" id="N69045">May 9 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N69050">The British line is pushed back at Ypres. The British attack and gain ground (which is subsequently relinquished) near Fromelles.</p>
<p id="N69053">The Battle of Souchez begins<span class="ref"> (see July 13)</span>.</p>
<p id="N69060"><span class="theatre">Gallipoli</span>:—Turkish trenches at Sari Bair are stormed by the Australians.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-05-10" id="N69066">May 10 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N69071">The Germans retreat in the Baltic Provinces but continue to advance in Galicia.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-05-11" id="N69074">May 11 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N69079">The Germans evacuate Shavli (Baltic Provinces)<span class="ref"> (see May 1)</span>.</p>
<p id="N69086"><span class="theatre">The Cameroons</span>:—Eseka is captured by the Allies.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-05-12" id="N69092">May 12 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N69097"><span class="theatre">South-West Africa</span>:—Union forces capture Windhoek, the capital of the Colony.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-05-13" id="N69103">May 13 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N69108">A fierce German attack at Ypres: the British line is restored after hard fighting.</p>
<p id="N69111">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Goliath</span></i> (battleship) is torpedoed off Gallipoli, while inside the Straits protecting the French flank.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-05-14" id="N69117">May 14 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N69122">The Battle of the San: Jaroslav is taken by the Austro-Germans.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-05-15" id="N69125">May 15 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N69130"><span class="theatre">The Caucasus</span>:—The Russians capture Van.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-05-16" id="N69136">May 16 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N69141">The Battle of Festubert begins: the British advance<span class="ref"> (see May 25)</span>.</p>
<p id="N69148">The Austrians are defeated in South Poland.</p>
<p id="N69151">A Zeppelin raid on Calais.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-05-17" id="N69154">May 17 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N69159">The San is crossed by the Austro-Germans.</p>
<p id="N69162">A Zeppelin raid on Ramsgate.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-05-18" id="N69165">May 18 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N69170"><span class="theatre">Gallipoli</span>:—The Turks attack the Australians and are repulsed.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-05-19" id="N69176">May 19 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N69181">The Austro-Germans capture Lutkow (Galicia).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-05-20" id="N69184">May 20 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N69189"><span class="person">Admiral von Essen</span>, Commander-in-Chief of the Russian Baltic fleet, dies of pneumonia.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-05-23" id="N69192">May 23 (Whit Sunday)</p>
<p id="N69197">Italy declares war on Austria.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-05-24" id="N69200">May 24 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N69205">The end of the Second Battle of Ypres<span class="ref"> (see April 22)</span>.</p>
<p id="N69212">The Italians cross the frontier into Austria (midnight, 24th-25th).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-05-25" id="N69215">May 25 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N69220">The formation of a new Coalition Ministry is announced in the House of Commons.</p>
<p id="N69223">The end of the Battle of Festubert<span class="ref"> (see May 16)</span>; the British gains are consolidated.</p>
<p id="N69226">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Triumph</span></i> (battleship) is sunk by a submarine off Gaba Tepe, Gallipoli.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-05-26" id="N69232">May 26 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N69237">The constitution of the new British Government is announced: Prime Minister, <span class="person">Mr. Asquith</span>; Foreign Secretary, <span class="person">Sir E. Grey</span>; Secretary for India, <span class="person">Mr. Chamberlain</span>; Secretary for War, <span class="person">Lord Kitchener</span>; First Lord of the Admiralty, <span class="person">Mr. Balfour</span>; Minister of Munitions, <span class="person">Mr. Lloyd George</span><span class="ref"> (see Aug. 4, 1914, and Dec. 10, 1916)</span>.</p>
<p id="N69240">The British submarine E11 torpedoes a Turkish transport in Constantinople harbour.</p>
<p id="N69243">A Zeppelin raid on Southend.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-05-27" id="N69246">May 27 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N69251">The Italians capture Ala and Grado.</p>
<p id="N69254">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Majestic</span></i> (battleship) is torpedoed off Cape Helles, Gallipoli.</p>
<p id="N69260">A French air-raid on Ludwigshaven.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-05-28" id="N69263">May 28 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N69268">The appointment of <span class="person">Admiral Sir Henry Jackson</span> as First Sea Lord in succession to <span class="person">Lord Fisher</span> is announced<span class="ref"> (see Oct. 29, 1914, and Nov. 29, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-05-29" id="N69271">May 29 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N69276">The French capture Ablain (near Souchez).</p>
<p id="N69279">The Italians occupy Valona (Albania).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-05-30" id="N69282">May 30 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N69287">The Austro-Germans attack Przemysl.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-05-31" id="N69290">May 31 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N69295">The French capture the sugar factory at Souchez.</p>
<p id="N69298">A Zeppelin raid on London.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-06-01" id="N69301">June 1 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N69306">The Austro-Germans capture Stryj.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-06-02" id="N69309">June 2 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N69314">A German attack at Hooge is repulsed by the British.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-06-03" id="N69317">June 3 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N69322">The Austro-Germans recapture Przemysl<span class="ref"> (see March 22)</span>.</p>
<p id="N69329"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—The British capture Amara.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-06-04" id="N69335">June 4 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N69340"><span class="theatre">Gallipoli</span>:—A third Allied attack on Krithia and Achi Baba results in a slight gain of ground at certain points.</p>
<p id="N69346">A Zeppelin raid on the east coast of England.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-06-06" id="N69349">June 6 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N69354">A Zeppelin raid on the east coast of England.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-06-07" id="N69357">June 7 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N69362">The Italians begin a general advance on the Isonzo Front.</p>
<p id="N69365">Sub-Lieut. R. A. J. Warneford destroys a Zeppelin over Belgium. A Zeppelin in its shed near Brussels is destroyed by British airmen.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-06-08" id="N69368">June 8 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N69373">Stanislau is recaptured by the Austrians<span class="ref"> (see March 4)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-06-09" id="N69380">June 9 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N69385"><span class="theatre">The Isonzo front</span>:—Monfalcone is captured by the Italians.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-06-10" id="N69391">June 10 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N69396">The Austro-Germans are defeated near Zurawno, where they had crossed the Dniester.</p>
<p id="N69399"><span class="theatre">The Cameroons</span>:—Garua surrenders to the Allies.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-06-12" id="N69405">June 12 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N69410">The British Government rescinds the order concerning the treatment of German submarine prisoners<span class="ref"> (see March 8 and April 12)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-06-14" id="N69417">June 14 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N69422">The Russian retirement on Grodek begins.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-06-15" id="N69425">June 15 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N69430"><span class="theatre">The Isonzo Front</span>:—The Italians attack the Podgora position.</p>
<p id="N69436">A Zeppelin raid on the north-east coast of England.</p>
<p id="N69439">A French air-raid on Karlsruhe.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-06-16" id="N69442">June 16 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N69447">The British attack and gain ground on the Bellewarde Ridge, east of Ypres.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-06-17" id="N69450">June 17 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N69455">The Isonzo Front:-The Italians attack at Plava.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-06-18" id="N69458">June 18 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N69463">The Austrians are defeated at Plava, and the town is captured by the Italians.</p>
<p id="N69466"><span class="theatre">Gallipoli</span>:—The Turks attack and are repulsed.</p>
<p id="N69472">An Austrian squadron raids Fano on the Italian coast.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-06-20" id="N69475">June 20 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N69480">The Germans attack in the Argonne.</p>
<p id="N69483">The Russians are defeated at Rava Russka; the Grodek position is turned.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-06-21" id="N69486">June 21 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N69491"><span class="theatre">Gallipoli</span>:—The Allies attack and gain ground.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-06-22" id="N69497">June 22 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N69502">The Austrians recapture Lemberg<span class="ref"> (see Sept. 3, 1914)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-06-23" id="N69505">June 23 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N69510"><span class="theatre">East Africa</span>:—Bukoba on Lake Victoria Nyanza is captured by the British.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-06-25" id="N69516">June 25 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N69521"><span class="theatre">The Cameroons</span>:—The Allies capture Lome.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-06-27" id="N69527">June 27 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N69532">The Austro-Germans occupy Halicz.</p>
<p id="N69535"><span class="theatre">Gallipoli</span>:—The British attack and gain ground.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-06-29" id="N69541">June 29 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N69546"><span class="theatre">Gallipoli</span>:—The Turks attack in strength<span class="ref"> (see July 1)</span>.</p>
<p id="N69556"><span class="theatre">Cameroons</span>:—The Allies occupy Ngaundere.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-06-30" id="N69562">June 30 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N69567">The Russians retreat before a powerful German offensive between the Bug and the Vistula.</p>
<p id="N69570">The British destroyer <i><span class="vessel">Lightning</span></i> is sunk in the North Sea.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-07-01" id="N69576">July 1 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N69581"><span class="theatre">Gallipoli</span>:—The Turkish offensive fails completely after fierce fighting<span class="ref"> (see June 29)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-07-02" id="N69591">July 2 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N69596">An offensive is launched by the Italians on the Isonzo: they advance on Gorizia<span class="ref"> (see July 29)</span>.</p>
<p id="N69603"><span class="theatre">South-West Africa</span>:—Union forces capture Otavifontein.</p>
<p id="N69609">The German cruiser <i><span class="vessel">Pommern</span></i> is torpedoed by a British submarine in the Baltic.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-07-04" id="N69615">July 4 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N69620"><span class="theatre">Gallipoli</span>:—A strong Turkish attack is repulsed.</p>
<p id="N69626"><span class="theatre">South-West Africa</span>:—The Germans are defeated at Gaub.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-07-05" id="N69632">July 5 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N69637">The German advance on Warsaw is checked.</p>
<p id="N69640">In the Aden Protectorate Lahej is taken by the Turks.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-07-06" id="N69643">July 6 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N69648">The British capture trenches near Pilkem.</p>
<p id="N69651">A German success at St. Mihiel.</p>
<p id="N69654">The Russians defeat the Austrians near Krasnik.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-07-07" id="N69657">July 7 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N69662">An Italian attack at Gorizia is repulsed.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-07-08" id="N69665">July 8 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N69670">The Italian cruiser <i><span class="vessel">Amalfi</span></i> is sunk by an Austrian submarine in the Adriatic.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-07-09" id="N69676">July 9 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N69681">The German forces in South-West Africa surrender unconditionally to <span class="person">General Botha</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-07-11" id="N69684">July 11 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N69689">The <i><span class="vessel">Königsberg</span></i> is finally destroyed in the Rufiji River (East Africa) by British river monitors<span class="ref"> (see Oct. 30 and Nov. 10, 1914)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-07-13" id="N69699">July 13 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N69704">The end of the Battle of Souchez<span class="ref"> (see May 9)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-07-14" id="N69711">July 14 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N69716">The Austro-Germans launch an offensive which covers the whole Eastern Front; they capture Przasnysz<span class="ref"> (see Feb. 27)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-07-15" id="N69723">July 15 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N69728">The Germans advance towards Riga.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-07-16" id="N69731">July 16 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N69736">Heavy fighting on the Eastern Front; the Battle of Krasnostav begins.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-07-18" id="N69739">July 18 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N69744">The Russians are defeated at Krasnostav.</p>
<p id="N69747">Windau (on the coast of Courland) is captured by the Germans.</p>
<p id="N69750">The Italian cruiser <i><span class="vessel">Giuseppe Garibaldi</span></i> is sunk by an Austrian submarine.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-07-19" id="N69756">July 19 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N69761">The Third Battle for Warsaw begins<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 5)</span>. The Germans force a crossing of the Upper Bug.</p>
<p id="N69768"><span class="theatre">The Isonzo Front</span>:—The Italians capture Monte San Michele.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-07-20" id="N69774">July 20 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N69779">The Germans advance on Kovno<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 17)</span>.</p>
<p id="N69786"><span class="theatre">The Isonzo Front</span>:—An Italian success at Podgora.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-07-21" id="N69792">July 21 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N69797">A British success at Hooge.</p>
<p id="N69800">The Germans gain a crossing of the Vistula at Nova Alexandria.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-07-22" id="N69803">July 22 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N69808">The Germans invest Ivangorod.</p>
<p id="N69811"><span class="theatre">The Isonzo Front</span>:—The Italians continue to gain ground.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-07-23" id="N69817">July 23 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N69822">The Germans force a crossing of the Narev.</p>
<p id="N69825">An Austrian squadron bombards Ortona (on the eastern coast of Italy).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-07-25" id="N69828">July 25 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N69833">The Italians occupy the island of Pelagosa (Adriatic).</p>
<p id="N69836"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—Nasiriyeh is captured by the British.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-07-26" id="N69842">July 26 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N69847">There is heavy fighting before Warsaw.</p>
<p id="N69850">A British submarine sinks a German destroyer near the German coast.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-07-27" id="N69853">July 27 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N69858">The Germans close in on three sides of Warsaw.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-07-28" id="N69861">July 28 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N69866">The Germans cross the Vistula in force.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-07-29" id="N69869">July 29 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N69874">The Russian line is broken on the Lublin-Cholm railway.</p>
<p id="N69877">The end of the Italian offensive on the Isonzo<span class="ref"> (see July 2)</span>; it results in a valuable advance and the capture of many prisoners by the Italians.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-07-30" id="N69884">July 30 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N69889">A successful German attack with liquid fire (first use of this) at Hooge; a British counter-attack fails<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 9)</span>.</p>
<p id="N69896">The Austro-Germans occupy Lublin. The Russians retire rapidly.</p>
<p id="N69899">A British submarine sinks a German transport in the Baltic.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-07-31" id="N69902">July 31 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N69907">The Austro-Germans occupy Cholm.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-08-01" id="N69910">Aug. 1 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N69915">Mitau is occupied by the Germans<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 16)</span>.</p>
<p id="N69922"><span class="theatre">Rhodesia</span>:—The Germans are driven back from Abercorn.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-08-03" id="N69928">Aug. 3 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N69933">The Germans force the line of the Narev.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-08-04" id="N69936">Aug. 4 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N69941">The Russians evacuate the Blonie lines, 15 miles west of Warsaw.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-08-05" id="N69944">Aug. 5 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N69949">Warsaw, Ivangorod, and Vladimir Volynski are captured by the Austro-Germans<span class="ref"> (see July 19 and 22)</span>. The Russians prepare to evacuate Riga.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-08-06" id="N69952">Aug. 6 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N69957"><span class="theatre">Gallipoli</span>:—The Battles of Sari Bair<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 11)</span> and Suvla<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 15)</span> begin: the British effect a surprise landing in Suvla Bay and launch an offensive against the Turks at other points.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-08-07" id="N69971">Aug. 7 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N69976">The Germans are repulsed near Riga.</p>
<p id="N69979"><span class="theatre">Gallipoli</span>:—Slight successes are gained against the Turkish positions above Suvla Bay.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-08-08" id="N69985">Aug. 8 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N69990"><span class="theatre">Gallipoli</span>:—The New Zealanders capture Chunuk Bair. This is the critical day at Suvla<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 10)</span>.</p>
<p id="N70000"><span class="theatre">Persian Gulf</span>:—Bushire is occupied by the British.</p>
<p id="N70006">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">India</span></i> (armed merchant cruiser) is sunk by a submarine off the Norwegian coast.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-08-09" id="N70012">Aug. 9 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N70017">A successful British counter-attack at Hooge: the trenches lost on July 30 are recaptured.</p>
<p id="N70020">A British submarine sinks a Turkish battleship, the <i><span class="vessel">Kheyr-ed-Din Barbarossa</span></i>.</p>
<p id="N70026">The British destroyer <i><span class="vessel">Lynx</span></i> is mined off the Moray Firth.</p>
<p id="N70032">A Zeppelin raid on the east coast of England.</p>
<p id="N70035">A Zeppelin is destroyed near Ostend.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-08-10" id="N70038">Aug. 10 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N70043">The German advance beyond the Vistula begins.</p>
<p id="N70046"><span class="theatre">Gallipoli</span>:—The Turks regain Chunuk Bair.</p>
<p id="N70052">A German squadron fails to force its way into the Gulf of Riga<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 17, 18, and 21)</span>.</p>
<p id="N70059">The German mine-layer and raider <i><span class="vessel">Meteor</span></i> is blown up, to avoid capture by British cruisers near the German coast.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-08-11" id="N70065">Aug. 11 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N70070"><span class="theatre">Gallipoli</span>:—The end of the Battle of Sari Bair<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 6)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-08-12" id="N70080">Aug. 12 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N70085">Syedlets (Poland) is taken by the Germans.</p>
<p id="N70088">A Zeppelin raid on the east coast of England.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-08-14" id="N70091">Aug. 14 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N70096">A German submarine sinks a British transport, the <i><span class="vessel">Royal Edward</span></i>, in the Ægean (the first British transport to be lost).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-08-15" id="N70102">Aug. 15 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N70107">The Germans take Vlodava (Poland).</p>
<p id="N70110"><span class="theatre">Gallipoli</span>:—The end of the Battle of Suvla<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 6)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-08-16" id="N70120">Aug. 16 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N70125">The Russians retake Mitau<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 1)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-08-17" id="N70132">Aug. 17 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N70137">The Germans capture Kovno<span class="ref"> (see July 20)</span>.</p>
<p id="N70144">A German squadron enters the Gulf of Riga<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 10, 18, and 21)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-08-18" id="N70151">Aug. 18 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N70156">The Germans cut the Brest-Bialystok railway.</p>
<p id="N70159">A Russian naval success in the Gulf of Riga: the German squadron which has entered the Gulf suffers severe losses.</p>
<p id="N70162">A British submarine torpedoes the German battle-cruiser <i><span class="vessel">Moltke</span></i> in the Baltic.</p>
<p id="N70168">The British submarine E13 is shelled by German warships when aground in Danish waters. She is wrecked and interned.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-08-19" id="N70171">Aug. 19 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N70176">A German submarine sinks the White Star liner <i><span class="vessel">Arabic</span></i> south of Ireland.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-08-20" id="N70182">Aug. 20 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N70187">Italy declares war on Turkey.</p>
<p id="N70190">Novo-Georgievsk is captured by the Germans; a further Russian retreat follows.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-08-21" id="N70193">Aug. 21 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N70198">The British and French Governments declare cotton an absolute contraband of war.</p>
<p id="N70201"><span class="theatre">Gallipoli</span>:—A fresh British attack on the Turkish positions at Suvla fails.</p>
<p id="N70207">The German naval forces retire from the Gulf of Riga<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 17 and 18)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-08-23" id="N70214">Aug. 23 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N70219">The Germans take Ossowietz. The Austro-Germans occupy Kovel.</p>
<p id="N70222">A Franco-British squadron bombards Zeebrugge.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-08-25" id="N70225">Aug. 25 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N70230">Brest-Litovsk is taken by the Germans.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-08-26" id="N70233">Aug. 26 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N70238">The Russians evacuate the fort of Olita on the Niemen.</p>
<p id="N70241">A British aeroplane bombs and sinks a German submarine near Ostend.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-08-27" id="N70244">Aug. 27 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N70249">Germany notifies the U.S.A. that her submarine commanders are henceforward forbidden to sink merchantmen without warning.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-08-28" id="N70252">Aug. 28 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N70257">A great German attack on the Dvina line begins.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-08-30" id="N70260">Aug. 30 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N70265">A Russian victory on the Strypa in Southern Galicia.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-09-01" id="N70268">Sept. 1 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N70273">The Germans capture Lutsk<span class="ref"> (see Sept. 23 and 28)</span> and storm part of the defences of Grodno. The Austro-Germans capture Brody (Galicia)<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 23, 1914)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-09-02" id="N70280">Sept. 2 (Thur.) Sedan capitulated 1870.</p>
<p id="N70285">The Germans capture Grodno. The Austro-Germans cross the Styr, the Sereth, and the Strypa.</p>
<p id="N70288">The British transport <i><span class="vessel">Sutherland</span></i> is torpedoed in the Ægean (loss of life small).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-09-03" id="N70294">Sept. 3 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N70299">The Russians re-enter Grodno temporarily, but are forced across the Dvina at Friedrichstadt.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-09-04" id="N70302">Sept. 4 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N70307">The Germans complete the occupation of Grodno.</p>
<p id="N70310">A German submarine torpedoes the Allan liner <i><span class="vessel">Hesperian</span></i> off Ireland.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-09-05" id="N70316">Sept. 5 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N70321">The Tzar formally assumes command of the Russian armies; the Grand Duke Nicholas is appointed Viceroy in the Caucasus.</p>
<p id="N70324">A British success at Hafiz Kor on the North-West Frontier of India.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-09-06" id="N70327">Sept. 6 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N70332">A French air-raid on Saarbrücken.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-09-07" id="N70335">Sept. 7 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N70340">The Battle of Tarnopol begins<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 23, 1914)</span>.</p>
<p id="N70343">British and French warships bombard the Belgian coast.</p>
<p id="N70346">A Zeppelin raid on the east coast of England (17 killed).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-09-08" id="N70349">Sept. 8 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N70354">The Battle of Tarnopol on the Sereth ends in a Russian victory.</p>
<p id="N70357">A Zeppelin raid on the east coast of England and on London (20 killed).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-09-09" id="N70360">Sept. 9 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N70365">Further Russian successes on the Sereth.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-09-12" id="N70368">Sept. 12 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N70373">The Germans storm Meiszagola and cut the Vilna-Dvinsk railway.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-09-16" id="N70376">Sept. 16 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N70381">The Germans occupy Pinsk.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-09-18" id="N70384">Sept. 18 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N70389">Vilna capitulates to the Germans.</p>
<p id="N70392">British and French warships bombard the Belgian coast.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-09-19" id="N70395">Sept. 19 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N70400">The British transport <i><span class="vessel">Ramazan</span></i> is torpedoed and sunk in the Ægean with heavy loss of life in Indian troops.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-09-20" id="N70406">Sept. 20 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N70411">The Russians retake Vidzy.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-09-22" id="N70414">Sept. 22 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N70419">A French air-raid on Stuttgart.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-09-23" id="N70422">Sept. 23 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N70427">The Russians retake Lutsk and Dubno<span class="ref"> (see Sept. 1 and 28)</span>.</p>
<p id="N70434">Bulgaria mobilises<span class="ref"> (see Oct. 11)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-09-24" id="N70441">Sept. 24 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N70446">A German attack on Dvinsk fails.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-09-25" id="N70449">Sept. 25 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N70454">The Battle of Loos begins: the British capture Loos and make a considerable advance in its neighbourhood<span class="ref"> (see Oct. 15)</span>.</p>
<p id="N70461">The French attack at the Vimy Ridge and in Champagne (the Battle of Champagne).</p>
<p id="N70464"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—<span class="person">General Townshend</span> reaches Kut-el-Amara.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-09-26" id="N70470">Sept. 26 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N70475">Fierce fighting round Loos and Hulluch; the British lose ground.</p>
<p id="N70478">The French capture Souchez.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-09-28" id="N70481">Sept. 28 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N70486">The Russians abandon Lutsk<span class="ref"> (see Sept. 1 and 23)</span>.</p>
<p id="N70489"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—The First Battle of Kut-el-Amara begins.</p>
<p id="N70495">The Italian battleship <i><span class="vessel">Benedetto Brin</span></i> is destroyed by an accidental explosion.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-09-29" id="N70501">Sept. 29 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N70506">Heavy fighting for the Hohenzollern Redoubt (near Loos).</p>
<p id="N70509">Heavy fighting on the French front in Champagne and on the Vimy Ridge.</p>
<p id="N70512"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—The British capture Kut-el-Amara and 2000 prisoners.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-10-03" id="N70518">Oct. 3 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N70523">The Germans counter-attack near Loos and retake most of the Hohenzollern Redoubt.</p>
<p id="N70526">A great battle for Dvinsk begins<span class="ref"> (see Oct. 10)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-10-04" id="N70533">Oct. 4 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N70538">Russian ultimatum to Bulgaria.</p>
<p id="N70541"><span class="theatre">The Caucasus</span>:—The Turks are defeated by the Russians near Van.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-10-05" id="N70547">Oct. 5 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N70552"><span class="person">Lord Derby</span> is appointed Director of Recruiting in Great Britain.</p>
<p id="N70555"><span class="person">M. Venizelos</span> resigns and <span class="person">M. Zaimis</span> becomes Greek Premier<span class="ref"> (see Nov. 4)</span>.</p>
<p id="N70562">Allied troops land at Salonika.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-10-06" id="N70565">Oct. 6 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N70570">Crossings of the Save and the Danube are forced by the Austro-Germans; Serbia is thus invaded for the fourth time.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-10-08" id="N70573">Oct. 8 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N70578">German counter-attacks in Champagne and near Loos are repulsed with heavy loss.</p>
<p id="N70581">The Austro-Germans capture Belgrade.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-10-09" id="N70584">Oct. 9 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N70589">Austria invades Montenegro.</p>
<p id="N70592"><span class="theatre">The Cameroons</span>:—Wum Biagas is captured by the British.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-10-10" id="N70598">Oct. 10 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N70603">The German attack on Dvinsk fails<span class="ref"> (see Oct. 3)</span>.</p>
<p id="N70610">Semendria is taken by the Austrians.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-10-11" id="N70613">Oct. 11 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N70618">Bulgaria invades Serbia<span class="ref"> (see Oct. 14)</span>. Serbia appeals to Greece for aid.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-10-12" id="N70625">Oct. 12 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N70630"><span class="person">Edith Cavell</span> is executed at Brussels.</p>
<p id="N70633">Greece refuses Serbia's appeal.</p>
<p id="N70636">The Russians attack near Dvinsk.</p>
<p id="N70639">A Zeppelin raid on London (many casualties).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-10-13" id="N70642">Oct. 13 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N70647"><span class="person">M. Delcassé</span>, the French Minister for Foreign Affairs, resigns.</p>
<p id="N70650">The British attack near Loos with partial success.</p>
<p id="N70653">A Zeppelin raid on London (59 killed).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-10-14" id="N70656">Oct. 14 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N70661">Bulgaria declares war on Serbia<span class="ref"> (see Oct. 11)</span>.</p>
<p id="N70668">A Russian success near Dvinsk.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-10-15" id="N70671">Oct. 15 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N70676">Great Britain declares war on Bulgaria.</p>
<p id="N70679">The end of the Battle of Loos<span class="ref"> (see Sept. 25)</span>.</p>
<p id="N70686">The Bulgarians take Vranja.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-10-16" id="N70689">Oct. 16 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N70694">France declares war on Bulgaria.</p>
<p id="N70697"><span class="theatre">Alsace</span>:—The French recover the Hartmannsweilerkopf (lost after much previous fighting).</p>
<p id="N70703"><span class="person">Sir Ian Hamilton</span> is recalled from Gallipoli, <span class="person">Sir Charles Monro</span> being appointed to succeed him.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-10-17" id="N70706">Oct. 17 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N70711">The Italians capture Pregasina.</p>
<p id="N70714">A French air-raid on Trèves.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-10-18" id="N70717">Oct. 18 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N70722"><span class="person">Sir Edward Carson</span> resigns his seat in the British Cabinet.</p>
<p id="N70725">The Germans advance on Riga.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-10-19" id="N70728">Oct. 19 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N70733">Italy declares war on Bulgaria.</p>
<p id="N70736">A French force drives the Bulgarians from Strumnitza.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-10-21" id="N70739">Oct. 21 (Thur.) Trafalgar, 1805.</p>
<p id="N70744">The Bulgarians capture Veles<span class="ref"> (see Oct. 25 and 29)</span>.</p>
<p id="N70747">An Allied squadron bombards the harbour of Dedeagatch and other points of military importance on the Bulgarian coast.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-10-22" id="N70750">Oct. 22 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N70755">The 'Group' system of enlistment comes into operation in Great Britain.</p>
<p id="N70758">The Bulgarians capture Uskub and Rumanovo.</p>
<p id="N70761">The Italians advance on the Isonzo front.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-10-23" id="N70764">Oct. 23 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N70769">The Austro-Germans force the passage of the Danube at Orsova.</p>
<p id="N70772"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—The British reach Azizie in their advance on Baghdad.</p>
<p id="N70778">A British submarine sinks the German cruiser <i><span class="vessel">Prinz Adalbert</span></i> in the Baltic.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-10-24" id="N70784">Oct. 24 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N70789">The Germans are within ten miles of Riga.</p>
<p id="N70792">The Danube route to Constantinople is opened to the Germans by their victories in Serbia.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-10-25" id="N70795">Oct. 25 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N70800">The Austro-German and Bulgarian forces effect a junction in the Kraina district. The Serbians recapture Veles<span class="ref"> (see Oct. 21 and 29)</span>.</p>
<p id="N70807"><span class="theatre">The Cameroons</span>:—Sende is occupied by the French.</p>
<p id="N70813">The British destroyer <i><span class="vessel">Velox</span></i> is mined off the Nab lightship.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-10-26" id="N70819">Oct. 26 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N70824">The British transport <i><span class="vessel">Marquette</span></i> is torpedoed in the Ægean.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-10-27" id="N70830">Oct. 27 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N70835">French troops effect a junction with the Serbians at Veles. The French and British are in position across the Vardar.</p>
<p id="N70838">The Russian Black Sea Fleet bombards Varna.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-10-28" id="N70841">Oct. 28 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N70846">The French Ministry resigns: <span class="person">M. Briand</span> becomes Premier<span class="ref"> (see March 17, 1917)</span>.</p>
<p id="N70853">King George is thrown from his horse and injured in France.</p>
<p id="N70856"><span class="person">Sir Charles Monro</span> assumes command in Gallipoli.</p>
<p id="N70859">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Argyll</span></i> (cruiser) is wrecked off the east coast of Scotland (no lives lost).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-10-29" id="N70865">Oct. 29 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N70870">Veles is retaken by the Bulgarians<span class="ref"> (see Oct. 21 and 25)</span>.</p>
<p id="N70873">The British mine-sweeper <i><span class="vessel">Hythe</span></i> is sunk off Gallipoli.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-10-30" id="N70879">Oct. 30 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N70884">The Germans capture the Butte of Tahure.</p>
<p id="N70887">The Serbian arsenal at Kragujevatz is captured by the Austrians.</p>
<p id="N70890"><span class="theatre">The Cameroons</span>:—Eseka is captured by the Allies.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-10-31" id="N70896">Oct. 31 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N70901">A Russian counter-offensive near Dvinsk begins.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-11-02" id="N70904">Nov. 2 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N70909">A Russian success on the Strypa: 5000 prisoners are taken.</p>
<p id="N70912">An Italian success on the Isonzo front.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-11-03" id="N70915">Nov. 3 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N70920">The Russians advance south-east of Dvinsk.</p>
<p id="N70923">The British transport <i><span class="vessel">Woodfield</span></i> is sunk by a submarine off Morocco (loss of life small).</p>
<p id="N70929"><span class="theatre">The Cameroons</span>:—Tibati is occupied by the Allies.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-11-04" id="N70935">Nov. 4 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N70940">The resignation of <span class="person">M. Zaimis</span>, the Greek Premier, is announced<span class="ref"> (see Oct. 5)</span>.</p>
<p id="N70947">Turkish attacks at Anzac are repulsed.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-11-05" id="N70950">Nov. 5 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N70955">The Russians force back the Germans in the Riga district.</p>
<p id="N70958"><span class="theatre">Serbia</span>:—Nish is captured by the Bulgarians after three days' fierce fighting. The main German and Bulgarian forces effect a junction at Krivivir, north of Nish.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-11-06" id="N70964">Nov. 6 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N70969"><span class="person">M. Skouloudis</span> becomes Greek Premier<span class="ref"> (see June 22, 1916)</span>.</p>
<p id="N70976">A British success at Bango Mountain in the Cameroons.</p>
<p id="N70979">The British submarine E20 is lost in the Dardanelles.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-11-07" id="N70982">Nov. 7 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N70987">A Note is received from the U.S.A. protesting against the maritime policy of Great Britain and France.</p>
<p id="N70990">The Russians capture Olai (west of Riga).</p>
<p id="N70993">A German submarine sinks the Italian liner <i><span class="vessel">Ancona</span></i> off Sardinia; many are drowned, including 25 Americans.</p>
<p id="N70999">A British submarine sinks the German light cruiser <i><span class="vessel">Undine</span></i> in the Baltic.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-11-09" id="N71005">Nov. 9 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N71010">A Russian victory near Kolki, on the Styr: 3500 prisoners are taken.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-11-10" id="N71013">Nov. 10 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N71018">Heavy fighting between the Russians and the Germans near Riga.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-11-11" id="N71021">Nov. 11 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N71026">The War Committee of the British Cabinet is appointed. <span class="person">Mr. Churchill</span> leaves the Government.</p>
<p id="N71029">A Russian victory at Kemmern near Riga: the Germans are forced to retreat.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-11-12" id="N71032">Nov. 12 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N71037">The Germans henceforward control the railway from Belgrade to Constantinople.</p>
<p id="N71040"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—The British under <span class="person">General Townshend</span> advance on Ctesiphon.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-11-14" id="N71046">Nov. 14 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N71051">Fierce fighting for the 'Labyrinth' in Artois.</p>
<p id="N71054">An Austrian air-raid on Verona.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-11-15" id="N71057">Nov. 15 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N71062">An Austrian success on the Styr.</p>
<p id="N71065"><span class="theatre">Gallipoli</span>:—A successful attack is made on Turkish trenches by the 52nd Division.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-11-16" id="N71071">Nov. 16 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N71076">The Bulgarians capture Prilep. The French repulse Bulgarian attacks between Krivolak and Strumnitza.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-11-17" id="N71079">Nov. 17 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N71084">The British hospital ship <i><span class="vessel">Anglia</span></i> is sunk by a mine in the Channel (85 lives lost).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-11-21" id="N71090">Nov. 21 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N71095"><span class="theatre">Serbia</span>:—Fall of Novi Bazar to the Germans.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-11-22" id="N71101">Nov. 22 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N71106">A German success on the Dvina.</p>
<p id="N71109"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—The Battle of Ctesiphon begins: the chief Turkish positions are captured<span class="ref"> (see Nov. 24)</span>.</p>
<p id="N71119">A revolt, instigated by Germany, breaks out in Persia.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-11-23" id="N71122">Nov. 23 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N71127">The Serbians retreat towards Albania. The Serbian Government leaves Mitrovitza for Prisrend.</p>
<p id="N71130">Rovereto is taken by the Italians.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-11-24" id="N71133">Nov. 24 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N71138"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—The Battle of Ctesiphon ends in the defeat of the Turks, but at the price of very heavy British losses<span class="ref"> (see Nov. 22)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-11-25" id="N71148">Nov. 25 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N71153"><span class="theatre">Serbia</span>:—The Austrians capture Mitrovitza and Prishtina. The Serbian seat of Government is moved to Scutari in Albania.</p>
<p id="N71159"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—The British retreat from Ctesiphon towards Azizie.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-11-28" id="N71165">Nov. 28 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N71170">The Serbian army retreats into Albania.</p>
<p id="N71173">A German submarine is sunk off the Belgian coast by a bomb from a British aeroplane.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-11-29" id="N71176">Nov. 29 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N71181">The Bulgarians occupy Prisrend.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-11-30" id="N71184">Nov. 30 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N71189"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—The British retreat from Azizie on Kut-el-Amara.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-12-03" id="N71195">Dec. 3 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N71200"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—The British reach Kut-el-Amara.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-12-04" id="N71206">Dec. 4 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N71211">British reinforcements are landed at Salonika.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-12-05" id="N71214">Dec. 5 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N71219"><span class="theatre">Serbia</span>:—Monastir is taken by the Bulgarians.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-12-06" id="N71225">Dec. 6 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N71230">The Allied Council meets in Paris (its first meeting).</p>
<p id="N71233">The Bulgarians attack the British near Lake Doiran.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-12-07" id="N71236">Dec. 7 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N71241">Ipek (Montenegro) is taken by the Austrians; the British are forced back from Lake Doiran; the Allies begin to retire from Serbia into Greece.</p>
<p id="N71244"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—The siege of Kut-el-Amara begins<span class="ref"> (see April 29, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-12-08" id="N71254">Dec. 8 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N71259"><span class="theatre">Gallipoli</span>:—The evacuation of Suvla and Anzac begins<span class="ref"> (see Dec. 20, 1915, and Jan. 8, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-12-09" id="N71269">Dec. 9 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N71274">The Bulgarians occupy Diakhova, Dibra, and Okrida.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-12-11" id="N71277">Dec. 11 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N71282"><span class="theatre">Macedonia</span>:—The French and British repel Bulgarian attacks with heavy loss.</p>
<p id="N71288"><span class="theatre">Persia</span>:—The Russians occupy Hamadan after defeating the Persian rebels.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-12-12" id="N71294">Dec. 12 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N71299">Recruiting for the 'Derby' groups is closed in Great Britain.</p>
<p id="N71302">The Franco-British forces are in position before Salonika.</p>
<p id="N71305">The Bulgarians capture Doiran and Ghevgeli.</p>
<p id="N71308"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—A Turkish attack on Kut-el-Amara is repulsed.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-12-13" id="N71314">Dec. 13 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N71319"><span class="theatre">Western Egypt</span>:—In an action near Mersa Matruh an attack by Senussi Arabs is repulsed.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-12-14" id="N71325">Dec. 14 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N71330">It is announced that <span class="person">Sir H. Smith-Dorrien</span> is appointed to Supreme Command in East Africa<span class="ref"> (see Feb. 10, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-12-15" id="N71337">Dec. 15 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N71342">Resignation of <span class="person">Sir John French</span>; <span class="person">Sir Douglas Haig</span> succeeds him as British Commander-in-Chief in France.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-12-17" id="N71345">Dec. 17 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N71350">The German light cruiser <i><span class="vessel">Bremen</span></i> and a German torpedo boat are sunk in the Baltic by Allied submarines.</p>
<p id="N71356"><span class="theatre">Albania</span>:—Elbasan is taken by the Bulgarians.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-12-20" id="N71362">Dec. 20 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N71367">The first 'Derby' groups are called up for service.</p>
<p id="N71370"><span class="theatre">Gallipoli</span>:—The evacuation of Anzac and Suvla is completed<span class="ref"> (see Dec. 8)</span>.</p>
<p id="N71380"><span class="theatre">Albania</span>:—Durazzo is occupied by the Italians.</p>
<p id="N71386"><span class="theatre">Persia</span>:—The Russians occupy Kum; this marks the end of the Persian revolt.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-12-21" id="N71392">Dec. 21 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N71397"><span class="person">Sir William Robertson</span> is appointed Chief of the British Imperial General Staff<span class="ref"> (see Feb. 16, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p id="N71400"><span class="theatre">The Cameroons</span>:—Mangeles is occupied by the French.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-12-24" id="N71406">Dec. 24 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N71411">The French liner <i><span class="vessel">Ville de Ciotat</span></i> is torpedoed in the Mediterranean.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-12-25" id="N71417">Dec. 25 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N71422"><span class="theatre">Western Egypt</span>:—The main Senussi force is attacked and routed near Mersa Matruh.</p>
<p id="N71428"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—Turkish attacks on Kut-el-Amara are repulsed.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-12-27" id="N71434">Dec. 27 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N71439">Heavy fighting between the Russians and the Austrians on the Bessarabia-Bukovina frontier.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-12-28" id="N71442">Dec. 28 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N71447">The decision of the British Cabinet in favour of Compulsory Service is announced.</p>
<p id="N71450">The Indian Corps leaves France.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-12-29" id="N71453">Dec. 29 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N71458">In a sea fight off Cattaro a French submarine and two Austrian destroyers are sunk.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-12-30" id="N71461">Dec. 30 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N71466">The P. &amp; O. liner <i><span class="vessel">Persia</span></i> is torpedoed in the Mediterranean.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1915-12-31" id="N71472">Dec. 31 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N71477">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Natal</span></i> (cruiser) is blown up in Cromarty Firth by an internal explosion.</p>
</div>

<hr class="chap"/>
<h2><a name="sixteen" id="sixteen">1916</a></h2>

<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-01-01" id="N71493">Jan. 1 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N71498">The Russians gain successes on the Styr and the Strypa.</p>
<p id="N71501"><span class="theatre">The Cameroons</span>:—The British capture Jaunde (the capital of the German colony).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-01-02" id="N71507">Jan. 2 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N71512">The Russians approach Czernowitz.</p>
<p id="N71515">The British passenger steamer <i><span class="vessel">Glengyle</span></i> is sunk by a submarine in the Mediterranean.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-01-04" id="N71521">Jan. 4 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N71526"><span class="person">Lord Derby</span>'s report on the recruiting campaign in Great Britain is issued.</p>
<p id="N71529"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—The Kut relieving force advances from Ali-el-Gharb.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-01-05" id="N71535">Jan. 5 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N71540">The Military Service Bill that inaugurates conscription is introduced in the British House of Commons.</p>
<p id="N71543">The Russians advance in the Bukovina.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-01-06" id="N71546">Jan. 6 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N71551">Recruiting for the 'Derby' groups reopens in Great Britain.</p>
<p id="N71554"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—The British relieving force defeats the Turks before Kut, but its further progress is checked by floods.</p>
<p id="N71560">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">King Edward VII.</span></i> (battleship) is sunk by a mine off the north coast of Scotland.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-01-08" id="N71566">Jan. 8 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N71571">The evacuation of Gallipoli is completed<span class="ref"> (see Dec. 8, 1915)</span>.</p>
<p id="N71578">The Russians capture Chartorysk (50 miles east of Kovel).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-01-10" id="N71581">Jan. 10 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N71586"><span class="theatre">Montenegro</span>:—The Austrians capture Mount Lovtchen.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-01-11" id="N71592">Jan. 11 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N71597">A French force lands at Corfu to prepare for the transfer thither of Serbian troops from Albania.</p>
<p id="N71600"><span class="theatre">The Caucasus</span>:—The Russians advance on Erzerum.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-01-13" id="N71606">Jan. 13 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N71611">Cettinje, the capital of Montenegro, is occupied by the Austrians.</p>
<p id="N71614"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—The Turks are again defeated before Kut.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-01-14" id="N71620">Jan. 14 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N71625">An Austrian cruiser is sunk off Cattaro by a French submarine.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-01-15" id="N71628">Jan. 15 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N71633">The first Serbian troops land at Corfu.</p>
<p id="N71636">The steamship <i><span class="vessel">Ariadne</span></i> is sunk by the <i><span class="vessel">Möwe</span></i>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-01-16" id="N71645">Jan. 16 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N71650">A Russian success near Pinsk.</p>
<p id="N71653"><span class="person">General Sarrail</span> assumes command of the Allied forces at Salonika.</p>
<p id="N71656">A battle begins in the Caucasus (near Erzerum) between the Russians and the Turks.</p>
<p id="N71659">The liner <i><span class="vessel">Appam</span></i> is captured by the <i><span class="vessel">Möwe</span></i> off the Canaries<span class="ref"> (see Feb. 1 and March 4)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-01-17" id="N71672">Jan. 17 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N71677">A Russian victory in the Caucasus: the Turks retire on Erzerum.</p>
<p id="N71680">The <i><span class="vessel">Clan MacTavish</span></i> is sunk by the <i><span class="vessel">Möwe</span></i>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-01-18" id="N71689">Jan. 18 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N71694">Allied warships bombard Dedeagatch and Porto Lagos on the Bulgarian coast.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-01-21" id="N71697">Jan. 21 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N71702"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—Action of Um-el-Hannah: the Kut relieving force is repulsed.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-01-22" id="N71708">Jan. 22 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N71713"><span class="theatre">Montenegro</span>:—Antivari is taken by the Austrians.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-01-23" id="N71719">Jan. 23 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N71724">The Austrians complete their possession of Montenegro by the occupation of Scutari.</p>
<p id="N71727"><span class="theatre">Western Egypt</span>:—A British column disperses the Senussi Arabs and burns their camp.</p>
<p id="N71733">A German air-raid on Kent.</p>
<p id="N71736">A French air-raid on Metz.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-01-24" id="N71739">Jan. 24 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N71744">German attacks near Neuville meet with some success.</p>
<p id="N71747">A French air-raid on Monastir.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-01-27" id="N71750">Jan. 27 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N71755">The U.S.A. Government publishes a Note of protest against the British search of mails.</p>
<p id="N71758">A German attack on the British near Loos is repulsed.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-01-29" id="N71761">Jan. 29 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N71766">A Zeppelin raid on Paris.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-01-31" id="N71769">Jan. 31 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N71774">A Zeppelin raid on the Midlands (67 killed); a Zeppelin, the <span class="notation">L19</span>, is wrecked in the North Sea while returning from the raid.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-02-01" id="N71777">Feb. 1 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N71782">The British liner <i><span class="vessel">Appam</span></i> arrives at Norfolk, Virginia, manned by a German prize crew.</p>
<p id="N71788">A German air-raid on Salonika.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-02-02" id="N71791">Feb. 2 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N71796">The Dutch steamer <i><span class="vessel">Artemis</span></i> is torpedoed by a German submarine.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-02-03" id="N71802">Feb. 3 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N71807"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—Heavy fighting before Kut.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-02-04" id="N71813">Feb. 4 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N71818">Heavy fighting round Dvinsk.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-02-08" id="N71821">Feb. 8 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N71826">The Russians cross the Dniester.</p>
<p id="N71829">The French cruiser <i><span class="vessel">Amiral Charnier</span></i> is sunk by a mine or submarine off the Syrian coast.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-02-09" id="N71835">Feb. 9 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N71840">A German air-raid on Ramsgate and Broadstairs. A British air-raid on Terhand.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-02-10" id="N71843">Feb. 10 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N71848">The Military Service Act (instituting compulsory service for single men aged 19 to 30) comes into operation in Great Britain.</p>
<p id="N71851">It is announced that <span class="person">Sir H. Smith-Dorrien</span> resigns command in East Africa owing to ill-health<span class="ref"> (see Dec. 14, 1915)</span>, and that <span class="person">Lieut.-General J. Smuts</span> is appointed to succeed him<span class="ref"> (see Jan. 28, 1917)</span>.</p>
<p id="N71862"><span class="theatre">The Caucasus</span>:—The Russian attack on Erzerum begins<span class="ref"> (see Feb. 16)</span>.</p>
<p id="N71872">The reorganised Serbian army (75,000 troops) is successfully concentrated at Corfu.</p>
<p id="N71875">British mine-sweepers are attacked off the Dogger Bank; the <i><span class="vessel">Arabis</span></i> is sunk.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-02-11" id="N71881">Feb. 11 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N71886">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Arethusa</span></i> (light cruiser) is sunk by a mine off the East Coast.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-02-12" id="N71892">Feb. 12 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N71897">The Germans make several attempts to cross the Yser Canal.</p>
<p id="N71900">German attacks near Vimy are repulsed.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-02-13" id="N71903">Feb. 13 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N71908"><span class="theatre">The Caucasus</span>:—A Russian success at Erzerum.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-02-14" id="N71914">Feb. 14 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N71919">A German success at 'the Bluff,' near Ypres: the British lose trenches<span class="ref"> (see March 2)</span>.</p>
<p id="N71926">An Austrian air-raid on Milan.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-02-16" id="N71929">Feb. 16 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N71934">Verdun is cleared of its civilian population.</p>
<p id="N71937"><span class="theatre">The Caucasus</span>:—Erzerum is captured by the Russians<span class="ref"> (see Feb. 10)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-02-19" id="N71947">Feb. 19 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N71952">German attacks are repulsed south of Arras and north of Ypres.</p>
<p id="N71955"><span class="theatre">The Caucasus</span>:—The Russians capture Akhlat and Mush, north-west of Lake Van<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 2)</span>.</p>
<p id="N71965"><span class="theatre">The Cameroons</span>:—The last German post in the Mora Mountains surrenders; this completes the occupation of the Cameroons by the Allies<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 25, 1914)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-02-20" id="N71975">Feb. 20 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N71980">A German air-raid on Walmer and Lowestoft.</p>
<p id="N71983">A British air-raid on Don, in Flanders.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-02-21" id="N71986">Feb. 21 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N71991">The Battle of Verdun begins<span class="ref"> (see July 1)</span>.</p>
<p id="N71998">A Zeppelin is destroyed near Revigny.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-02-22" id="N72001">Feb. 22 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N72006">The Germans gain ground before Verdun, capturing Haumont Wood and the French salient north of Beaumont.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-02-23" id="N72009">Feb. 23 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N72014">Portugal seizes interned German ships<span class="ref"> (see March 10)</span>.</p>
<p id="N72021">Further German progress and French withdrawals before Verdun.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-02-24" id="N72024">Feb. 24 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N72029">The French resist strongly before Verdun, but the German advance continues.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-02-25" id="N72032">Feb. 25 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N72037">A critical day in the Battle of Verdun: Fort Douaumont is stormed by the Germans.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-02-26" id="N72040">Feb. 26 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N72045">German attacks beyond Fort Douaumont are repulsed by the French; this ends the first stage of the Battle of Verdun.</p>
<p id="N72048"><span class="theatre">Western Egypt</span>:—The Senussi Arabs are defeated at Agagia.</p>
<p id="N72054">The French transport <i><span class="vessel">Provence II.</span></i> is sunk by a submarine in the Mediterranean with heavy loss of life.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-02-27" id="N72060">Feb. 27 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N72065"><span class="theatre">Verdun</span>:—A heavy bombardment by the Germans and some infantry fighting.</p>
<p id="N72071">Durazzo is captured by the Austrians.</p>
<p id="N72074"><span class="theatre">Persia</span>:—Kermanshah is captured by the Russians<span class="ref"> (see July 2, 1916)</span>.</p>
<p id="N72084">The P. &amp; O. liner <i><span class="vessel">Maloja</span></i> is sunk by a mine off Dover.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-02-29" id="N72090">Feb. 29 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N72095">An action is fought in the North Sea between H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Alcantara</span></i> (armed merchant cruiser) and the German raider <i><span class="vessel">Greif</span></i>, in which both are sunk.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-03-01" id="N72104">Mar. 1 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N72109">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Primula</span></i> (sloop) is sunk by a submarine in the Mediterranean.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-03-02" id="N72115">Mar. 2 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N72120">A British success near Ypres: 'the Bluff' is recaptured<span class="ref"> (see Feb. 14)</span>.</p>
<p id="N72127"><span class="theatre">Verdun</span>:—The Germans capture the village of Douaumont.</p>
<p id="N72133"><span class="theatre">The Caucasus</span>:—Bitlis (south-west of Lake Van) is captured by the Russians<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 2)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-03-03" id="N72143">Mar. 3 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N72148"><span class="theatre">Verdun</span>:—The French reoccupy Douaumont village; the Germans attack the village of Vaux.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-03-04" id="N72154">Mar. 4 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N72159">There is fierce fighting for the Hohenzollern Redoubt (near Loos).</p>
<p id="N72162"><span class="theatre">Verdun</span>:—The Germans again capture the village of Douaumont.</p>
<p id="N72168">The German Admiralty announces the safe return of the raider <i><span class="vessel">Möwe</span></i>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-03-05" id="N72174">Mar. 5 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N72179"><span class="theatre">Persia</span>:—Sinneh is taken by the Russians.</p>
<p id="N72185">A Zeppelin raid on the north-east coast of England.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-03-06" id="N72188">Mar. 6 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N72193"><span class="theatre">Verdun</span>:—The Germans advance up the northern slopes of the Côte de l'Oie.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-03-07" id="N72199">Mar. 7 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N72204">A further German success at Verdun: Hill 265 is carried.</p>
<p id="N72207"><span class="theatre">East Africa</span>:—The British advance in the Kilimanjaro district.</p>
<p id="N72213"><span class="theatre">The Caucasus</span>:—Rizeh is captured by the Russians.</p>
<p id="N72219">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Coquette</span></i> (destroyer) and the British torpedo boat No. 11 are sunk by mines off the east coast of England.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-03-08" id="N72225">Mar. 8 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N72230">Heavy fighting at Verdun: the French regain ground.</p>
<p id="N72233"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—The second attempt to relieve Kut fails, the British being repulsed at Es Sinn.</p>
<p id="N72239"><span class="theatre">The Caucasus</span>:—The Russians advance towards Trebizond.</p>
<p id="N72245">A French air-raid on Metz.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-03-09" id="N72248">Mar. 9 (Thurs.)</p>
<p id="N72253"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—The British relieving force falls back from Es Sinn.</p>
<p id="N72259">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Fauvette</span></i> (armed boarding-steamer) is sunk by a mine off the east coast of England.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-03-10" id="N72265">Mar. 10 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N72270">Germany declares war on Portugal<span class="ref"> (see Feb. 23)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-03-11" id="N72277">Mar. 11 (Sat)</p>
<p id="N72282"><span class="theatre">East Africa</span>:—Further British successes west of Taveta and near Kilimanjaro: the Germans retreat.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-03-12" id="N72288">Mar. 12 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N72293"><span class="theatre">Persia</span>:—Kerind is occupied by the Russians.</p>
<p id="N72299"><span class="theatre">East Africa</span>:—Moshi is occupied by the British.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-03-14" id="N72305">Mar. 14 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N72310"><span class="theatre">The Caucasus</span>:—The Russians occupy Mamakhatun<span class="ref"> (see May 31)</span>.</p>
<p id="N72320"><span class="theatre">Egypt</span>:—The British occupy Sollum.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-03-16" id="N72326">Mar. 16 (Thurs.)</p>
<p id="N72331">The resignation of <span class="person">Grand Admiral von Tirpitz</span> as Head of the German Navy is announced. He is succeeded by <span class="person">Admiral von Capelle</span>.</p>
<p id="N72334"><span class="theatre">Verdun</span>:—Heavy German attacks are repulsed.</p>
<p id="N72340">The Dutch liner <i><span class="vessel">Tubantia</span></i> is sunk by a German submarine.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-03-17" id="N72346">Mar. 17 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N72351">A fresh German offensive is launched against Russia.</p>
<p id="N72354"><span class="theatre">Egypt</span>:—A motor force under the Duke of Westminster rescues British prisoners from the Senussi by a successful raid.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-03-18" id="N72360">Mar. 18 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N72365">A German success at the Hohenzollern Redoubt.</p>
<p id="N72368">The First Battle of Lake Narotch (east of Vilna) begins<span class="ref"> (see April 14)</span>.</p>
<p id="N72375">The Dutch liner <i><span class="vessel">Palembang</span></i> is sunk by a German submarine.</p>
<p id="N72381">The French destroyer <i><span class="vessel">Renaudin</span></i> is sunk by an enemy submarine in the Adriatic.</p>
<p id="N72387">Allied air-raids on Metz and Zeebrugge.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-03-19" id="N72390">Mar. 19 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N72395"><span class="theatre">Persia</span>:—Ispahan is captured by the Russians.</p>
<p id="N72401">An air-raid on Kent by German seaplanes (one destroyed).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-03-20" id="N72404">Mar. 20 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N72409"><span class="theatre">Verdun</span>:—Renewed German attacks fail.</p>
<p id="N72415">Heavy fighting near Dvinsk and Riga.</p>
<p id="N72418">An action is fought between British and German destroyers off the Belgian coast: the Germans run for Zeebrugge.</p>
<p id="N72421">A big raid by Allied aeroplanes on Zeebrugge.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-03-22" id="N72424">Mar. 22 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N72429"><span class="theatre">Verdun</span>:—The Germans carry Avocourt Wood.</p>
<p id="N72435">A Russian success near Dvinsk.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-03-24" id="N72438">Mar. 24 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N72443">The <i><span class="vessel">Sussex</span></i> (passenger steamer) is torpedoed in the Channel by a German submarine.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-03-25" id="N72449">Mar. 25 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N72454">The Russians attack the Germans near Vilna.</p>
<p id="N72457">A raid by British seaplanes, convoyed by light cruisers and destroyers, on German airship sheds in Schleswig-Holstein: the British destroyer <i><span class="vessel">Medusa</span></i> is lost by collision, and two German patrol boats are sunk in the naval action which develops.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-03-27" id="N72463">Mar. 27 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N72468">A Conference of the Allies is held in Paris.</p>
<p id="N72471">A British success at St. Eloi: German trenches are captured<span class="ref"> (see April 7)</span>.</p>
<p id="N72478">The Russians again attack near Vilna.</p>
<p id="N72481">A German air-raid on Salonika.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-03-28" id="N72484">Mar. 28 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N72489"><span class="theatre">Verdun</span>:—The German attacks are renewed.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-03-30" id="N72495">Mar. 30 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N72500"><span class="theatre">Verdun</span>:—There is heavy fighting for Fort Douaumont; the Germans capture Malancourt.</p>
<p id="N72506">The Russian hospital ship <i><span class="vessel">Portugal</span></i> is sunk by an enemy submarine in the Black Sea.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-03-31" id="N72512">Mar. 31 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N72517">The British G.H.Q. are moved from St. Omer to Montreuil.</p>
<p id="N72520">A Zeppelin raid on England (which is followed by four more within a week). The Zeppelin <span class="notation">L15</span> is brought down at the mouth of the Thames.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-04-01" id="N72523">April 1 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N72528"><span class="theatre">Verdun</span>:—The Germans gain ground at Fort Vaux.</p>
<p id="N72534">A Zeppelin raid on the north-east coast of England.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-04-02" id="N72537">April 2 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N72542">An explosion occurs in a munitions factory at Faversham, Kent (106 killed).</p>
<p id="N72545">A Zeppelin raid on England and Scotland.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-04-03" id="N72548">April 3 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N72553">A British success at St. Eloi.</p>
<p id="N72556">A French success at Verdun.</p>
<p id="N72559"><span class="theatre">The Caucasus</span>:—A Russian attack on Trebizond begins<span class="ref"> (see April 18)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-04-04" id="N72569">April 4 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N72574"><span class="theatre">Verdun</span>:—The Germans attack at Douaumont and are repulsed.</p>
<p id="N72580"><span class="person">General Brussiloff</span> succeeds <span class="person">General Ivanoff</span> in command of the Russian armies of the South.</p>
<p id="N72583">A Zeppelin raid on the Eastern Counties.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-04-05" id="N72586">April 5 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N72591">A Zeppelin raid on the north-east of England.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-04-06" id="N72594">April 6 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N72599"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—A third attempt is made to relieve Kut: the Um-el-Hannah and Falahiyah positions are captured.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-04-07" id="N72605">April 7 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N72610">The Germans regain the trenches captured by the British at St. Eloi on March 27.</p>
<p id="N72613">The Russians again attack the German lines near Vilna.</p>
<p id="N72616"><span class="theatre">Macedonia</span>:—The Allied positions on the Vardar are bombarded.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-04-08" id="N72622">April 8 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N72627">Fierce fighting at Verdun: the French evacuate Bethincourt.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-04-09" id="N72630">April 9 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N72635">The British regain ground at St. Eloi.</p>
<p id="N72638"><span class="theatre">Verdun</span>:—A fierce German attack on the Mort Homme.</p>
<p id="N72644"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—The first British attack on the Sanna-i-Yat position is repulsed.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-04-10" id="N72650">April 10 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N72655">A British success at St. Eloi.</p>
<p id="N72658">A critical day at Verdun: German attacks on the Mort Homme are repulsed.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-04-11" id="N72661">April 11 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N72666">The Germans attack near Albert and continue their attacks at Verdun.</p>
<p id="N72669"><span class="theatre">Italy</span>:—The Alpini gain a success on the Adamello glacier.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-04-12" id="N72675">April 12 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N72680"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—The British make a second attack on the Sanna-i-Yat position: some ground is gained.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-04-13" id="N72686">April 13 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N72691"><span class="theatre">Egypt</span>:—Australian troops destroy a Turkish camp at Jifjaffa on the Egyptian frontier.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-04-14" id="N72697">April 14 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N72702">The end of the First Battle of Lake Narotch<span class="ref"> (see March 18)</span>; it leads to little change of position.</p>
<p id="N72709">British naval aeroplanes bomb Constantinople and Adrianople.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-04-15" id="N72712">April 15 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N72717">A Russian success in the Caucasus.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-04-16" id="N72720">April 16 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N72725"><span class="theatre">Verdun</span>:—The French attack at Douaumont and regain ground.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-04-17" id="N72731">April 17 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N72736">Fresh German attacks at Verdun, which gain ground.</p>
<p id="N72739">The Italians capture the Col di Lana (Trentino).</p>
<p id="N72742"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—A Turkish counter-attack on the Tigris is partially successful.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-04-18" id="N72748">April 18 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N72753"><span class="theatre">The Caucasus</span>:—Trebizond is captured by the Russians<span class="ref"> (see April 8)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-04-19" id="N72763">April 19 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N72768"><span class="theatre">Verdun</span>:—German attacks at Les Eparges are repulsed.</p>
<p id="N72774">A Note from the U.S.A. is presented to Germany demanding modification of her submarine policy<span class="ref"> (see May 4)</span>.</p>
<p id="N72781"><span class="theatre">The Caucasus</span>:—The Russians carry a strong enemy position west of Erzerum.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-04-20" id="N72787">April 20 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N72792">The rebellion breaks out in Ireland<span class="ref"> (see May 1)</span>.</p>
<p id="N72799"><span class="theatre">Verdun</span>:—The French gain ground near Fort Vaux.</p>
<p id="N72805">Russian troops reach Marseilles.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-04-21" id="N72808">April 21 (Good Friday)</p>
<p id="N72813"><span class="person">Sir Roger Casement</span> is captured on the coast of Kerry, near Tralee<span class="ref"> (see June 26, Aug. 3)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-04-22" id="N72820">April 22 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N72825"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—A third British attack on the Sanna-i-Yat position is repulsed.</p>
<p id="N72831">A British success in German East Africa, by which the occupation of the northern half of the colony is made secure.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-04-23" id="N72834">April 23 (Easter Sunday)</p>
<p id="N72839">An engagement at Katia on the Egyptian frontier.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-04-24" id="N72842">April 24 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N72847">Riots in Dublin: the Sinn Feiners occupy the Post Office and St. Stephen's Green.</p>
<p id="N72850"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia (night of the 24th-25th)</span>:—An unsuccessful attempt is made to run a supply ship into Kut.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-04-25" id="N72856">April 25 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N72861">German battle-cruisers bombard Lowestoft and Great Yarmouth; they are pursued home but escape in safety.</p>
<p id="N72864">A Zeppelin raid on the eastern counties of England.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-04-26" id="N72867">April 26 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N72872">Fighting in Dublin.</p>
<p id="N72875">A Zeppelin raid on Kent.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-04-27" id="N72878">April 27 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N72883">Martial law is proclaimed throughout Ireland.</p>
<p id="N72886">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Russell</span></i> (battleship) is sunk by a mine off Malta.</p>
<p id="N72892">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Nasturtium</span></i> (sloop) is sunk by a mine in the Mediterranean.</p>
<p id="N72898">The German submarine UC5 is captured in the North Sea.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-04-28" id="N72901">April 28 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N72906">The Second Battle of Lake Narotch: a Russian reverse.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-04-29" id="N72909">April 29 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N72914"><span class="theatre">Italy</span>:—The Austrians are driven from the Adamello glacier by Alpini.</p>
<p id="N72920"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—Kut-el-Amara capitulates, after a siege of 144 days, owing to failure of supplies<span class="ref"> (see Dec. 7, 1915)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-05-01" id="N72930">May 1 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N72935">The Irish rebellion is crushed<span class="ref"> (see April 20)</span>.</p>
<p id="N72942">A Zeppelin raid on Scotland and the northeast of England.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-05-02" id="N72945">May 2 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N72950">Resignation of <span class="person">Mr. Birrell</span>, Secretary of State for Ireland.</p>
<p id="N72953"><span class="theatre">Verdun</span>:—A French success at the Mort Homme.</p>
<p id="N72959">A Zeppelin raid on Scotland and England: the Zeppelin <span class="notation">L20</span>, returning from this raid, is wrecked off Norway.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-05-03" id="N72962">May 3 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N72967"><span class="theatre">Verdun</span>:—Fresh German attacks on the Mort Homme begin.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-05-04" id="N72973">May 4 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N72978">Germany, in a Note to the U.S.A., agrees to sink no ships without warning<span class="ref"> (see April 19)</span>.</p>
<p id="N72985">The Zeppelin <span class="notation">L 7</span> is destroyed off Schleswig by the gunfire of British warships.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-05-05" id="N72988">May 5 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N72993"><span class="theatre">Verdun</span>:—Fierce fighting for Hill 304.</p>
<p id="N72999">A Zeppelin is destroyed near Salonika.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-05-07" id="N73002">May 7 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N73007"><span class="theatre">Verdun</span>:—A great German attack on Hill 304 results in a slight gain of ground.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-05-08" id="N73013">May 8 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N73018"><span class="theatre">Verdun</span>:—The Germans lose ground at the Mort Homme and Fort Douaumont.</p>
<p id="N73024">The White Star liner <i><span class="vessel">Cymric</span></i> is torpedoed without warning by a German submarine near the Irish coast.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-05-10" id="N73030">May 10 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N73035"><span class="theatre">Persia</span>:—Kasr-i-Shirin is occupied by the Russians.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-05-11" id="N73041">May 11 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N73046">A German success near Vermelles: 500 yards of British front-line trenches are captured.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-05-12" id="N73049">May 12 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N73054">A British counter-attack near Vermelles is partially successful.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-05-13" id="N73057">May 13 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N73062">The Germans attack the British at Ploegsteert Wood and are repulsed.</p>
<p id="N73065"><span class="theatre">The Caucasus</span>:—The Russians retire on Erzerum.</p>
<p id="N73071">The British monitor <span class="notation"><span class="notation">M30</span></span> is sunk in action in the Gulf of Smyrna.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-05-14" id="N73074">May 14 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N73079"><span class="theatre">Italy</span>:—The Battle of the Trentino begins<span class="ref"> (see June 4)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-05-15" id="N73089">May 15 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N73094">The British capture a German trench on the Vimy Ridge.</p>
<p id="N73097">The Austrians advance in the Trentino.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-05-16" id="N73100">May 16 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N73105">A Turkish force is defeated by an Australian detachment in the Sinai Peninsula.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-05-17" id="N73108">May 17 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N73113"><span class="theatre">Verdun</span>:—Fresh German attacks on Hill 304 are unsuccessful.</p>
<p id="N73119">British monitors engage German destroyers off the Belgian coast and put them to flight.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-05-18" id="N73122">May 18 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N73127">An Air Board is constituted in Great Britain.</p>
<p id="N73130">The Italians retire in the Trentino.</p>
<p id="N73133"><span class="theatre">Sinai Peninsula</span>:—A British raid on El Arish.</p>
<p id="N73139"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—Russian cavalry, after a ride of 200 miles from the Persian frontier, join the British on the Tigris.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-05-19" id="N73145">May 19 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N73150">A British success at Vimy Ridge.</p>
<p id="N73153"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—The Turks evacuate the Es Sinn position and withdraw to Kut.</p>
<p id="N73159">A German air-raid on Kent.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-05-20" id="N73162">May 20 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N73167"><span class="theatre">Verdun</span>:—Fierce fighting for the Mort Homme.</p>
<p id="N73173">A further Italian withdrawal in the Trentino.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-05-21" id="N73176">May 21 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N73181">The Germans win trenches from the British on the Vimy Ridge.</p>
<p id="N73184"><span class="theatre">Verdun</span>:—Part of the Mort Homme is captured by the Germans, but the French advance on the Douaumont Plateau and carry the Haudromont quarries.</p>
<p id="N73190"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—The British advance on the south bank of the Tigris.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-05-22" id="N73196">May 22 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N73201"><span class="theatre">The Sudan</span>:—The action of Beringia: the Sultan of Darfur is defeated.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-05-23" id="N73207">May 23 (Tues.) Ramillies, 1706.</p>
<p id="N73212"><span class="theatre">The Sudan</span>:—El Fasher, the capital of Darfur, is captured by the British.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-05-24" id="N73218">May 24 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N73223"><span class="theatre">Verdun</span>:—Cumières is stormed by the Germans.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-05-25" id="N73229">May 25 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N73234">Compulsory service for married as well as single men between 18 and 41 becomes law in Great Britain, to take effect from June 24.</p>
<p id="N73237">The Germans win successes at Verdun and Vimy.</p>
<p id="N73240"><span class="theatre">Italy</span>:—Bettale is taken by the Austrians.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-05-26" id="N73246">May 26 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N73251">The Bulgarians and Germans advance into Greek Macedonia and capture Fort Rupel.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-05-29" id="N73254">May 29 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N73259">A great German attack at Verdun: the French line holds.</p>
<p id="N73262">A renewed British advance in German East Africa: Neu Langenburg is occupied.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-05-30" id="N73265">May 30 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N73270"><span class="theatre">Verdun</span>:—The French abandon the Bethincourt-Cumières road.</p>
<p id="N73276"><span class="theatre">Italy</span>:—The battle for the Pass of Buola.</p>
<p id="N73282"><span class="theatre">East Africa</span>:—A Belgian force invades Ruanda.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-05-31" id="N73288">May 31 (Wed.) Union Day, South Africa, 1910.</p>
<p id="N73293">The Battle of Jutland is fought between the main British and German fleets: the German fleet, with considerable loss, escapes aided by mist.</p>
<p id="N73296"><span class="theatre">Italy</span>:—Asiago and Arsiero are captured by the Austrians<span class="ref"> (see June 25 and 27)</span>.</p>
<p id="N73306"><span class="theatre">The Caucasus</span>:—Mamakhatun is retaken by the Turks<span class="ref"> (see March 14 and July 12)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-06-01" id="N73316">June 1 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N73321"><span class="theatre">Verdun</span>:—The Germans begin a fresh attack on Fort Vaux.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-06-02" id="N73327">June 2 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N73332">The Germans capture trenches from the Canadians at Ypres<span class="ref"> (see June 13)</span>, and from the French at Verdun.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-06-04" id="N73339">June 4 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N73344"><span class="theatre">Verdun</span>:—Fort Vaux is isolated.</p>
<p id="N73350">A great Russian offensive is launched in the Bukovina and the Ukraine (with the 8th and 9th Armies): rapid progress is made, and many thousands of prisoners are captured.</p>
<p id="N73353">The end of the Battle of the Trentino: the Austrian advance is checked<span class="ref"> (see May 14)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-06-05" id="N73360">June 5 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N73365">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Hampshire</span></i> is sunk off the Orkneys and <span class="person">Lord Kitchener</span> drowned.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-06-06" id="N73371">June 6 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N73376">The Germans gain ground from the British at Hooge.</p>
<p id="N73379"><span class="theatre">Verdun</span>:—Fierce German attacks on Fort Vaux.</p>
<p id="N73385">The Russians capture Lutsk from the Austrians.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-06-07" id="N73388">June 7 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N73393"><span class="theatre">Verdun</span>:—Fort Vaux is captured by the Germans.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-06-08" id="N73399">June 8 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N73404">The Russian 7th Army launches an offensive in Eastern Galicia: Buczacz is captured.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-06-09" id="N73407">June 9 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N73412">The War Council of the Allies meets in London.</p>
<p id="N73415"><span class="theatre">Arabia</span>:—The Emir Hussein, Grand Sherif of Mecca, revolts against the Turks and gains possession of Mecca.</p>
<p id="N73421">The Italian transport <i><span class="vessel">Principe Umberto</span></i> is sunk by a submarine in the Adriatic (many lives lost).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-06-10" id="N73427">June 10 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N73432">A great Russian victory near Czernowitz: 35,000 prisoners are captured.</p>
<p id="N73435"><span class="theatre">East Africa</span>:—Momba is occupied by the British.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-06-11" id="N73441">June 11 (Whit Sunday)</p>
<p id="N73446"><span class="theatre">Verdun</span>:—A German advance near Thiaumont.</p>
<p id="N73452">Venice is bombed by Austrian seaplanes.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-06-12" id="N73455">June 12 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N73460">The Germans are within four miles of Verdun.</p>
<p id="N73463">A further Russian advance in the Bukovina.</p>
<p id="N73466"><span class="theatre">Southern Persia</span>:—Kerman is occupied by a British force.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-06-13" id="N73472">June 13 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N73477">The Canadians win back the trenches they had lost at Ypres (from south of Sanctuary Wood to north of Hill 60: see June 2).</p>
<p id="N73480">The Russian 4th Army advances on Baranovitchi.</p>
<p id="N73483">In the Baltic, Russian destroyers attack a convoy of German steamers escorted by warships: they sink the German auxiliary cruiser <i><span class="vessel">Herrmann</span></i> and two German torpedo boats.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-06-14" id="N73489">June 14 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N73494">The Allied Economic Conference meets in Paris.</p>
<p id="N73497">The British occupy Wilhelmsthal, the capital of German East Africa.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-06-15" id="N73500">June 15 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N73505">Fresh German attacks at Verdun.</p>
<p id="N73508">Russian victories on the Strypa and on the frontiers of Galicia.</p>
<p id="N73511"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—A British success on the Tigris.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-06-16" id="N73517">June 16 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N73522"><span class="theatre">Arabia</span>:—The Grand Sherif of Mecca captures Jeddah from the Turks.</p>
<p id="N73528">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Eden</span></i> (destroyer) is sunk by a collision in the Channel.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-06-17" id="N73534">June 17 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N73539">Czernowitz is again captured by the Russians.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-06-18" id="N73542">June 18 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N73547">Death of von Moltke.</p>
<p id="N73550"><span class="person">Immelman</span>, the famous German airman, is shot down by a British airman.</p>
<p id="N73553">Russian progress continues in the Bukovina.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-06-19" id="N73556">June 19 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N73561">Fierce fighting between the Russians and Austrians before Kovel.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-06-21" id="N73564">June 21 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N73569">A Note is presented to the Greek Government by Great Britain, France, and Russia, demanding complete demobilisation of the Greek army.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-06-22" id="N73572">June 22 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N73577"><span class="person">M. Skouloudis</span>, the Greek Premier, resigns and is succeeded by <span class="person">M. Zaimis</span><span class="ref"> (see Nov. 4, 1915, and Sept. 11, 1916)</span>. Greece accepts the Allies' demands.</p>
<p id="N73580">The Germans are within three miles of Verdun.</p>
<p id="N73583">Further Russian progress in the Bukovina.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-06-23" id="N73586">June 23 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N73591">Fierce German attacks at Verdun: Fort Thiaumont is stormed.</p>
<p id="N73594">Kimpolung (Southern Bukovina) is captured by the Russians.</p>
<p id="N73597">The Great Eastern Railway Company's steamer <i><span class="vessel">Brussels</span></i> (master, Captain Charles Fryatt) is captured by a German torpedo flotilla and taken to Zeebrugge<span class="ref"> (see July 27)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-06-24" id="N73607">June 24 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N73612"><span class="theatre">Verdun</span>:—Fleury is stormed by the Germans; this is the extreme point of their advance.</p>
<p id="N73618">The Russians are in possession of almost all the Bukovina.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-06-25" id="N73621">June 25 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N73626"><span class="theatre">Verdun</span>:—A French success at Fleury.</p>
<p id="N73632">Asiago is recaptured by the Italians<span class="ref"> (see May 31)</span>; the Austrians are pressed back along the entire Trentino Front.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-06-26" id="N73635">June 26 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N73640">The trial of <span class="person">Sir Roger Casement</span> for high treason begins<span class="ref"> (see June 29)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-06-27" id="N73647">June 27 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N73652"><span class="theatre">Western Front</span>:—Heavy bombardments and many trench raids by the British.</p>
<p id="N73658">A Russian reverse near Kovel.</p>
<p id="N73661">The Italians recapture Arsiero<span class="ref"> (see May 31)</span> and Posina.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-06-28" id="N73668">June 28 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N73673">It is announced in the House of Commons that the British and French Governments have abandoned the Declaration of London.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-06-29" id="N73676">June 29 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N73681"><span class="person">Sir Roger Casement</span> is sentenced to death<span class="ref"> (see April 21, Aug. 3)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-06-30" id="N73688">June 30 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N73693"><span class="theatre">Verdun</span>:—The French recapture Fort Thiaumont.</p>
<p id="N73699">Heavy bombardments of the German lines along the Western Front.</p>
<p id="N73702">The Russians capture Kolomea (Galicia).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-07-01" id="N73705">July 1 (Sat.) (The Battle of the Boyne, 1690).</p>
<p id="N73710">The Battle of the Somme begins<span class="ref"> (see Nov. 17)</span>: Montaubon, Mametz, and other villages are captured by the British; the French capture Dompierre, Becquincourt, and other villages.</p>
<p id="N73713">The German offensive at Verdun is virtually at an end<span class="ref"> (see Feb. 21)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-07-02" id="N73720">July 2 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N73725"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—The British capture Fricourt; the French capture Curlu and Frise.</p>
<p id="N73731">The Battle of Baranovitchi (an important junction on the railway running south from Vilna) begins<span class="ref"> (see July 14)</span>: the Russians advance.</p>
<p id="N73738"><span class="theatre">Persia</span>:—Kermanshah is retaken by the Turks<span class="ref"> (see Feb. 27, 1916, and March 13, 1917)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-07-03" id="N73748">July 3 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N73753"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—Fighting is in progress for Ovillers, Contalmaison, and La Boiselle; the British capture Serre; the French take a number of villages beyond the German second position.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-07-04" id="N73759">July 4 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N73764"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—La Boiselle is captured by the British; the French advance towards Péronne.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-07-05" id="N73770">July 5 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N73775">The Russians advance towards the Stokhod.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-07-06" id="N73778">July 6 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N73783"><span class="person">Mr. Lloyd George</span> is appointed British Secretary of State for War.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-07-07" id="N73786">July 7 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N73791"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—The British line is advanced: Leipsig Redoubt is carried; Contalmaison is taken and lost.</p>
<p id="N73797"><span class="theatre">East Africa</span>:—The British occupy Tanga.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-07-08" id="N73803">July 8 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N73808">The Russians cross the Stokhod.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-07-09" id="N73811">July 9 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N73816"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—Heavy fighting on the British Front for Ovillers and in Trônes Wood; the French approach Péronne and capture Hardecourt.</p>
<p id="N73822">The German cargo-carrying submarine <i><span class="vessel">Deutschland</span></i> reaches Norfolk in Virginia<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 23)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-07-10" id="N73832">July 10 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N73837"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—The British capture Contalmaison.</p>
<p id="N73843"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—A Turkish attack on the British position near Sanna-i-Yat.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-07-11" id="N73849">July 11 (Tues.) Oudenarde, 1708.</p>
<p id="N73854">A German submarine bombards Seaham harbour.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-07-12" id="N73857">July 12 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N73862"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—The British complete the capture of Mametz Wood.</p>
<p id="N73868"><span class="theatre">The Caucasus</span>:—Mamakhatun is retaken by the Russians<span class="ref"> (see May 31)</span>.</p>
<p id="N73878"><span class="theatre">East Africa</span>:—The British capture Mwanza.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-07-14" id="N73884">July 14 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N73889">British attacks on the Somme are renewed: Bazentin-le-Petit and the greater part of Longueval are captured<span class="ref"> (see July 29)</span>; the British complete the capture of Trônes Wood.</p>
<p id="N73896">The Battle of Baranovitchi<span class="ref"> (see July 2)</span> ends in the repulse of strong German attacks with slight change of position.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-07-15" id="N73903">July 15 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N73908"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—The British abandon High Wood (entered the previous day), but advance towards Pozières; fierce fighting in Delville Wood.</p>
<p id="N73914">The Russian 11th Army launches an offensive towards Brody (Galicia).</p>
<p id="N73917"><span class="theatre">The Caucasus</span>:—The Russians capture Baiburt (between Erzerum and Trebizond).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-07-16" id="N73923">July 16 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N73928"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—The British complete the capture of Ovillers; fierce fighting on the French front near Péronne.</p>
<p id="N73934">Umlej surrenders to the Sherif of Mecca.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-07-18" id="N73937">July 18 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N73942"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—German counter-attacks in Delville Wood and Longueval are partially successful.</p>
<p id="N73948"><span class="theatre">The Caucasus</span>:—The Russians capture Kighi.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-07-19" id="N73954">July 19 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N73959"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—A British attack on Guillemont fails, but an advance is made near Thiepval.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-07-20" id="N73965">July 20 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N73970"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—A British success at High Wood; a French success near Hardecourt.</p>
<p id="N73976">The Russians advance across the Styr: 12,000 prisoners are captured.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-07-21" id="N73979">July 21 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N73984"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—The Germans attack the French near Chaulnes and are repulsed.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-07-22" id="N73990">July 22 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N73995">The Russians occupy Berestetchko, south of the Lipa.</p>
<p id="N73998">An action is fought between British and German light craft off the Belgian coast.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-07-23" id="N74001">July 23 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N74006"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—The British attack towards Pozières and make progress.</p>
<p id="N74012">Taif surrenders to the Grand Sherif of Mecca.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-07-24" id="N74015">July 24 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N74020"><span class="theatre">East Africa</span>:—The action of Malangali.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-07-25" id="N74026">July 25 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N74031"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—The British complete the capture of Pozières.</p>
<p id="N74037">The Russians advance on Brody (Galicia).</p>
<p id="N74040"><span class="theatre">The Caucasus</span>:—The Russians complete the conquest of Armenia by the capture of Erzingan.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-07-27" id="N74046">July 27 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N74051">Captain Fryatt is executed in the Jardin de l'Aurore at Bruges by order of a German court-martial<span class="ref"> (see June 23)</span>.</p>
<p id="N74058"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—The British complete the capture of Delville Wood.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-07-28" id="N74064">July 28 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N74069">Brody (Galicia) is captured by the Russians, with 20,000 prisoners and many guns.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-07-29" id="N74072">July 29 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N74077"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—The British complete the capture of Longueval.</p>
<p id="N74083">A Zeppelin raid on Lincolnshire and Norfolk.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-07-30" id="N74086">July 30 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N74091"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—A French success near Hardecourt.</p>
<p id="N74097">Russian troops land at Salonika.</p>
<p id="N74100"><span class="theatre">East Africa</span>:—The British occupy Dodoma.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-07-31" id="N74106">July 31 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N74111"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—The French advance near Maurepas.</p>
<p id="N74117">A Zeppelin raid on the east and south-east of England.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-08-01" id="N74120">Aug. 1 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N74125">The Russians attack before Kovel.</p>
<p id="N74128">The Italians bombard the Austrian positions on the Isonzo.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-08-02" id="N74131">Aug. 2 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N74136"><span class="theatre">The Caucasus</span>:—Mush and Bitlis are recaptured by the Turks<span class="ref"> (see Feb. 19, Mar. 2, and Aug. 23 and 24)</span>.</p>
<p id="N74142">The Italian dreadnought <i><span class="vessel">Leonardo da Vinci</span></i> is sunk by an internal explosion in Taranto harbour.</p>
<p id="N74148">A Zeppelin raid on the eastern counties of England.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-08-03" id="N74151">Aug. 3 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N74156"><span class="person">Sir Roger Casement</span> is hanged in Pentonville Prison<span class="ref"> (see June 29)</span>.</p>
<p id="N74163">Fierce fighting on the Stokhod; the Russian advance is checked.</p>
<p id="N74166"><span class="theatre">East Africa</span>:—Ujiji is captured by the Belgians.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-08-04" id="N74172">Aug. 4 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N74177"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—The British advance near Pozières.</p>
<p id="N74183">The Russians attack on the Sereth.</p>
<p id="N74186">The Turks attack on the Suez Canal (the Battle of Romani).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-08-05" id="N74189">Aug. 5 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N74194"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—A further British advance near Pozières.</p>
<p id="N74200">The Italians attack on the Isonzo (the Battle of Gorizia<span class="ref">: see Aug. 8 and 14</span>).</p>
<p id="N74203"><span class="theatre">Egypt</span>:—The Turks are routed in the Battle of Romani.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-08-06" id="N74209">Aug. 6 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N74214"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—A German counter-attack at Pozières is repulsed.</p>
<p id="N74220">A Russian success on the Sereth.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-08-07" id="N74223">Aug. 7 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N74228">The Russians attack south of the Dniester: Tysmienica (near Stanislau) is captured and many prisoners are taken.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-08-08" id="N74231">Aug. 8 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N74236"><span class="theatre">The Isonzo Front</span>:—The Italians capture Gorizia and take 12,000 prisoners<span class="ref"> (see Oct. 28, 1917)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-08-09" id="N74242">Aug. 9 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N74247">The French advance on a four-mile front north of the Somme.</p>
<p id="N74250">A Zeppelin raid on England. A British air-raid on the Zeppelin sheds near Brussels.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-08-10" id="N74253">Aug. 10 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N74258"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—The British and French advance at a number of points.</p>
<p id="N74264">Stanislau is captured by the Russians, with a large sector of the remaining Austrian defences in Eastern Galicia; over 80,000 prisoners and many guns are taken.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-08-11" id="N74267">Aug. 11 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N74272"><span class="theatre">Macedonia</span>:—Italian troops land at Salonika; a French success near Doiran.</p>
<p id="N74278"><span class="theatre">East Africa</span>:—Mpwapwa is occupied by the British.</p>
<p id="N74284">British airmen bombard the Zeppelin sheds near Brussels and Namur.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-08-12" id="N74287">Aug. 12 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N74292"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—The French advance near Hardecourt.</p>
<p id="N74298">The Italians advance on the Carso.</p>
<p id="N74301">A German seaplane bombs Dover.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-08-13" id="N74304">Aug. 13 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N74309"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—The British advance near Pozières; the French advance near Maurepas.</p>
<p id="N74315">The British destroyer <i><span class="vessel">Lassoo</span></i> is sunk by a mine off the Dutch coast.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-08-14" id="N74321">Aug. 14 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N74326">The end of the Battle of Gorizia<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 5)</span>, which results in an important advance and the capture of Gorizia and many prisoners by the Italians.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-08-15" id="N74329">Aug. 15 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N74334">The Russians occupy Jablonica (Carpathians).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-08-16" id="N74337">Aug. 16 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N74342"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—The French and British reach the Guillemont-Maurepas road.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-08-17" id="N74348">Aug. 17 (Thurs.)</p>
<p id="N74353">The Bulgarians attack near Salonika.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-08-18" id="N74356">Aug. 18 (Fri.) Gravelotte, 1870.</p>
<p id="N74361"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—The British attack along a front of 11 miles between Thiepval and Guillemont and capture important positions; the French gain ground near Maurepas.</p>
<p id="N74367"><span class="theatre">Macedonia</span>:—The Bulgarians advance towards Kavalla.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-08-19" id="N74373">Aug. 19 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N74378"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—The British capture important positions on the Thiepval Ridge.</p>
<p id="N74384">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Nottingham</span></i> and H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Falmouth</span></i> (light cruisers) are torpedoed in the North Sea. The British submarine E23 torpedoes a German battleship, the <i><span class="vessel">Westfalen</span></i>, in the North Sea.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-08-20" id="N74396">Aug. 20 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N74401"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—The Germans counterattack unsuccessfully near Thiepval.</p>
<p id="N74407"><span class="theatre">Macedonia</span>:—The Bulgarians capture Florina; a general offensive is launched by the Allies.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-08-22" id="N74413">Aug. 22 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N74418"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—The British gain ground before Thiepval and near Pozières.</p>
<p id="N74424"><span class="theatre">Verdun</span>:—The French advance between Fleury and Thiaumont Wood.</p>
<p id="N74430">The heights of the Jablonica Pass (Carpathians) are carried by the Russians.</p>
<p id="N74433"><span class="theatre">Macedonia</span>:—The Bulgarians are driven back by the British and Serbians on the Doiran Front.</p>
<p id="N74439"><span class="theatre">East Africa</span>:—Kilossa is captured by the British.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-08-23" id="N74445">Aug. 23 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N74450"><span class="theatre">The Caucasus</span>:—Bitlis is recaptured by the Russians<span class="ref"> (see Aug 2)</span>.</p>
<p id="N74460">The mercantile submarine <i><span class="vessel">Deutschland</span></i> arrives back in Germany<span class="ref"> (see July 9)</span>.</p>
<p id="N74470">A Zeppelin raid on the eastern counties of England.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-08-24" id="N74473">Aug. 24 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N74478"><span class="theatre">The Caucasus</span>:—Mush is recaptured by the Russians<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 2, 1916, and May 3, 1917)</span>.</p>
<p id="N74488">A Zeppelin raid on London and the eastern counties of England.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-08-25" id="N74491">Aug. 25 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N74496"><span class="theatre">Macedonia</span>:—The forts of Kavala are occupied by the Bulgarians.</p>
<p id="N74502">A raid by British naval aeroplanes on the Zeppelin sheds near Namur.</p>
<p id="N74505">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Duke of Albany</span></i> (armed boarding-steamer) is sunk by a submarine in the North Sea.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-08-26" id="N74511">Aug. 26 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N74516"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—A strong attack by the Prussian Guard near Thiepval is repulsed by the British.</p>
<p id="N74522"><span class="theatre">East Africa</span>:—Mrogoro, the seat of German Government in the colony, is captured by the British.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-08-27" id="N74528">Aug. 27 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N74533">Roumania declares war on Austria.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-08-28" id="N74536">Aug. 28 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N74541">Germany declares war on Roumania.</p>
<p id="N74544">Italy declares war on Germany.</p>
<p id="N74547">The Roumanians invade Transylvania.</p>
<p id="N74550"><span class="person">Sir Stanley Maude</span> assumes command of the British forces in Mesopotamia<span class="ref"> (see Nov. 18, 1917)</span>.</p>
<p id="N74553">British warships bombard the forts of Kavala.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-08-29" id="N74556">Aug. 29 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N74561">Hindenburg succeeds <span class="person">Falkenhayn</span> as Chief of the German General Staff.</p>
<p id="N74564">Brasso (Kronstadt) is occupied by the Roumanians<span class="ref"> (see Oct. 7)</span>.</p>
<p id="N74571"><span class="theatre">East Africa</span>:—Neu Iringa is occupied by the British.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-08-30" id="N74577">Aug. 30 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N74582">Turkey declares war on Roumania.</p>
<p id="N74585">The Russians advance in the Carpathians.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-08-31" id="N74588">Aug. 31 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N74593"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—A German attack at High Wood is repulsed by the British.</p>
<p id="N74599">The Russians continue to advance in the Carpathians and take many prisoners.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-09-01" id="N74602">Sept. 1 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N74607">An Allied naval demonstration at Athens.</p>
<p id="N74610">Bulgaria declares war on Roumania.</p>
<p id="N74613">Hermanstadt is occupied by the Roumanians.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-09-02" id="N74616">Sept. 2 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N74621">The Russians capture the Ploska Height near the Jablonica Pass (Carpathians).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-09-03" id="N74624">Sept. 3 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N74629"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—Guillemont and part of Ginchy are captured by the British; the French take Cléry.</p>
<p id="N74635">German and Bulgarian forces enter the Dobrudja.</p>
<p id="N74638">A Zeppelin raid on London and the Eastern Counties; a Zeppelin is brought down in flames at Cuffley by <span class="person">Lieut. W. L. Robinson</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-09-04" id="N74641">Sept. 4 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N74646"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—The advance of the French and British continues.</p>
<p id="N74652"><span class="theatre">East Africa</span>:—Dar-es-Salaam surrenders to British naval forces.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-09-05" id="N74658">Sept. 5 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N74663"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—Leuze Wood is captured by the British; south of the Somme the French make a notable advance.</p>
<p id="N74669">A Russian victory near Halicz (4500 prisoners).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-09-06" id="N74672">Sept. 6 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N74677">The French advance at Verdun and make further progress south of the Somme.</p>
<p id="N74680">The Russians advance rapidly on Halicz.</p>
<p id="N74683">The Bulgarians capture Tutrakan (Dobrudja).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-09-07" id="N74686">Sept. 7 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N74691">The Roumanians occupy Orsova (in Hungarian territory on the Danube: see Nov. 23).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-09-09" id="N74694">Sept. 9 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N74699"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—The British complete the capture of Ginchy.</p>
<p id="N74705">Silistria, the Roumanian fortress on the Danube, is captured by the Bulgarians.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-09-10" id="N74708">Sept. 10 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N74713"><span class="theatre">Macedonia</span>:—The British advance across the Struma.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-09-11" id="N74719">Sept. 11 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N74724">Resignation of <span class="person">M. Zaimis</span>, the Greek Premier<span class="ref"> (see June 22)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-09-12" id="N74731">Sept. 12 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N74736">The French advance north of the Somme and reach the Bapaume-Péronne road.</p>
<p id="N74739">The 4th Greek Army Corps at Kavala surrenders to the Germans.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-09-13" id="N74742">Sept. 13 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N74747"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—The French advance across the Bapaume-Péronne road.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-09-14" id="N74753">Sept. 14 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N74758"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—The British storm 'the Wonderwork' near Thiepval.</p>
<p id="N74764">A new Italian offensive is launched on the Isonzo front.</p>
<p id="N74767">The Roumanians advance in Transylvania, but are forced to retire in the Dobrudja.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-09-15" id="N74770">Sept. 15 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N74775"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—The British attack on a wide front; tanks are used for the first time; Martinpuich, Flers, and Courcelette are taken and the capture of High Wood is completed.</p>
<p id="N74781">The Italians capture San Grado (on the Carso).</p>
<p id="N74784"><span class="theatre">Macedonia</span>:—The Allies capture high ground overlooking Florina.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-09-16" id="N74790">Sept. 16 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N74795">A new Greek cabinet is formed under <span class="person">M. Kalogeropoulos</span>.</p>
<p id="N74798">The Russians and Roumanians are definitely in retreat in the Dobrudja.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-09-17" id="N74801">Sept. 17 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N74806">The French attack south of the Somme and capture Vermandovillers and Berny.</p>
<p id="N74809"><span class="theatre">The Isonzo Front</span>:—The Italians capture important positions and a number of prisoners.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-09-18" id="N74815">Sept. 18 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N74820"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—'The Quadrilateral' near Morval is stormed by the British. Deniécourt is captured by the French.</p>
<p id="N74826"><span class="theatre">Macedonia</span>:—The Allies capture Florina.</p>
<p id="N74832">The Russo-Roumanian army in the Dobrudja is forced to retire from strong positions.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-09-20" id="N74835">Sept. 20 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N74840"><span class="theatre">Transylvania</span>:—The Austro-Germans gain the summit of the Vulcan Pass.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-09-21" id="N74846">Sept. 21 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N74851">The Great Eastern Railway Company's steamer <i><span class="vessel">Colchester</span></i> is captured by German small craft and taken to Zeebrugge.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-09-23" id="N74857">Sept. 23 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N74862">A Zeppelin raid on England: two Zeppelins are brought down in Essex, the <span class="notation">L 32</span> and <span class="notation">L 33</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-09-25" id="N74865">Sept. 25 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N74870"><span class="theatre">Greece</span>:—<span class="person">M. Venizelos</span> leaves the Piræus for Crete, where he proclaims a Provisional Government four days later.</p>
<p id="N74876"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—Morval and Les Bœufs are captured by the British; Rancourt and Fregicourt are taken by the French.</p>
<p id="N74882">A Zeppelin raid on England.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-09-26" id="N74885">Sept. 26 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N74890"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—Gueudecourt is captured by the British and Combles by the British and French; the British attack Thiepval; the French advance east of Combles to St. Pierre Vaast Wood.</p>
<p id="N74896">The Roumanians regain ground in the Vulcan Pass.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-09-27" id="N74899">Sept. 27 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N74904"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—The British complete the capture of Thiepval.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-09-28" id="N74910">Sept. 28 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N74915"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—The greater part of Schwaben Redoubt, on the Thiepval Plateau, is captured by the British.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-09-29" id="N74921">Sept. 29 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N74926">A Greek Provisional Government is formed in Crete by <span class="person">M. Venizelos</span><span class="ref"> (see Sept. 25)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-10-01" id="N74933">Oct. 1 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N74938"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—Eaucourt l'Abbaye is captured by the British.</p>
<p id="N74944">The Bulgarians and Germans are checked in the Dobrudja.</p>
<p id="N74947">A Zeppelin raid on London: a Zeppelin is brought down near Potter's Bar by 2nd Lieut. W. J. Tempest.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-10-03" id="N74950">Oct. 3 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N74955">The Greek Cabinet resigns owing to the attitude of the Allies.</p>
<p id="N74958">The Roumanians counter-attack successfully both in Transylvania and the Dobrudja and capture many prisoners.</p>
<p id="N74961"><span class="theatre">Macedonia</span>:—The Serbians reach Kenali in their advance on Monastir.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-10-04" id="N74967">Oct. 4 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N74972"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—The French advance east of Morval.</p>
<p id="N74978"><span class="theatre">Macedonia</span>:—The British advance east of the Struma and capture a number of villages.</p>
<p id="N74984">The Cunard liner <i><span class="vessel">Franconia</span></i> and the French transport <i><span class="vessel">Gallia</span></i> are sunk by submarines in the Mediterranean.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-10-05" id="N74993">Oct. 5 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N74998">The Roumanians fall back in Transylvania.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-10-07" id="N75001">Oct. 7 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N75006"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—The British capture Le Sars.</p>
<p id="N75012"><span class="theatre">Transylvania</span>:—Brasso (Kronstadt) is recaptured by the Austro-Germans<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 29)</span>.</p>
<p id="N75022">The British advance in Macedonia.</p>
<p id="N75025">The German submarine <span class="notation">U53</span> reaches Newport, Rhode Island, after a voyage of seventeen days.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-10-08" id="N75028">Oct. 8 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N75033"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—The French advance to the outskirts of Sailly-Saillisel.</p>
<p id="N75039">The Germans advance in Transylvania.</p>
<p id="N75042">Eight ships are torpedoed off the American coast by the <span class="notation">U53</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-10-09" id="N75045">Oct. 9 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N75050">A new Greek Cabinet is formed by Professor Lambros.</p>
<p id="N75053"><span class="theatre">The Isonzo Front</span>:—The Italians capture important positions and many prisoners.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-10-10" id="N75059">Oct. 10 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N75064">An Allied ultimatum is presented to Greece demanding the surrender of the Greek fleet; the Greek Government protests but yields.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-10-11" id="N75067">Oct. 11 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N75072">The Allies take possession of the Greek fleet.</p>
<p id="N75075"><span class="theatre">The Isonzo Front</span>:—The Italian advance continues.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-10-12" id="N75081">Oct. 12 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N75086">A Franco-British raid by 40 aeroplanes on the mauser factories at Oberndorf.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-10-13" id="N75089">Oct. 13 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N75094">The Germans enter Roumania.</p>
<p id="N75097">Norway prohibits the use of her territorial waters by belligerent submarines.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-10-14" id="N75100">Oct. 14 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N75105"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—The British advance at Schwaben Redoubt; the French advance near Bouchavesnes and Ablaincourt.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-10-16" id="N75111">Oct. 16 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N75116">The Germans capture the Gyimes Pass leading into Northern Roumania.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-10-17" id="N75119">Oct. 17 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N75124">The Allies land troops at Athens.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-10-18" id="N75127">Oct. 18 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N75132"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—The French capture Sailly-Saillisel.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-10-19" id="N75138">Oct. 19 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N75143">A new offensive is launched by the Germans and Bulgarians in the Dobrudja.</p>
<p id="N75146">The German cruiser <i><span class="vessel">München</span></i> is sunk by a British submarine in the North Sea.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-10-20" id="N75152">Oct. 20 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N75157">The Russian dreadnought <i><span class="vessel">Imperatritsa Maria</span></i> is sunk by an internal explosion.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-10-21" id="N75163">Oct. 21 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N75168">Murder of the Austrian Premier, <span class="person">Count Sturgkh</span>.</p>
<p id="N75171"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—The British capture strong positions near Thiepval.</p>
<p id="N75177">The Germans and Bulgarians advance in the Dobrudja and capture Tuzla.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-10-22" id="N75180">Oct. 22 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N75185">The Germans and Bulgarians capture Constanza, the port of the Dobrudja. The Germans continue to advance through the Transylvanian passes.</p>
<p id="N75188">A German seaplane which raids Sheerness is destroyed.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-10-23" id="N75191">Oct. 23 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N75196">The British mine-sweeping sloop <i><span class="vessel">Genista</span></i> is sunk by a submarine in the Atlantic (many lives lost).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-10-24" id="N75202">Oct. 24 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N75207">The French attack at Verdun: the village and fort of Douaumont and other important positions are captured with 4500 prisoners<span class="ref"> (see Nov. 4)</span>.</p>
<p id="N75214"><span class="theatre">The Dobrudja</span>:—Chernavoda is captured by the Germans and Bulgarians.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-10-25" id="N75220">Oct. 25 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N75225">A further French advance at Verdun.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-10-27" id="N75228">Oct. 27 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N75233">German destroyers make a raid into the Straits of Dover: the empty British transport <i><span class="vessel">Queen</span></i> and the British destroyer <i><span class="vessel">Flirt</span></i> are sunk; the British destroyers <i><span class="vessel">Zulu</span></i> and <i><span class="vessel">Nubian</span></i> are severely damaged (subsequently these last two are made into one ship named the <i><span class="vessel">Zubian</span></i>).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-10-28" id="N75251">Oct. 28 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N75256">The Donaldson liner <i><span class="vessel">Marina</span></i> is sunk by a submarine without warning off Queenstown.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-10-29" id="N75262">Oct. 29 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N75267"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—The French capture trenches north of Sailly-Saillisel.</p>
<p id="N75273"><span class="person">Captain Boelcke</span>, the famous German airman, is shot down.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-10-30" id="N75276">Oct. 30 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N75281"><span class="theatre">East Africa</span>:—The Germans are defeated at Lupembe.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-10-31" id="N75287">Oct. 31 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N75292"><span class="theatre">Macedonia</span>:—The British advance in the Struma Valley.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-11-01" id="N75298">Nov. 1 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N75303"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—The Allies advance near Les Bœufs and Sailly.</p>
<p id="N75309">The Italians advance on the Isonzo Front in the sector between Gorizia and the sea: 4700 prisoners are captured.</p>
<p id="N75312">An action between destroyers in the North Sea.</p>
<p id="N75315">A raid on Pola by Italian torpedo-boats.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-11-02" id="N75318">Nov. 2 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N75323"><span class="theatre">Verdun</span>:—The French recapture Fort Vaux.</p>
<p id="N75329">The Italians continue to advance on the Carso.</p>
<p id="N75332">Russian warships bombard Constanza.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-11-03" id="N75335">Nov. 3 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N75340"><span class="theatre">Verdun</span>:—The French make further progress.</p>
<p id="N75346"><span class="theatre">Isonzo Front</span>:—The Italians make further progress on the Carso.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-11-04" id="N75352">Nov. 4 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N75357">The recapture by the French of all the main defences of Verdun is completed by the occupation of the Damloup work<span class="ref"> (see Oct. 24)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-11-05" id="N75364">Nov. 5 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N75369">Germany and Austria proclaim an 'independent State of Poland' with an 'hereditary Monarchy and Constitution.'</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-11-06" id="N75372">Nov. 6 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N75377"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—The French advance in St. Pierre Vaast Wood.</p>
<p id="N75383">The Germans advance in Roumania.</p>
<p id="N75386">The P. &amp; O. liner <i><span class="vessel">Arabia</span></i> is sunk by a submarine without warning in the Mediterranean.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-11-07" id="N75392">Nov. 7 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N75397"><span class="person">Mr. Wilson</span> is re-elected President of the United States.</p>
<p id="N75400">The French advance south of the Somme.</p>
<p id="N75403">The Russians and Roumanians advance in the Dobrudja.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-11-08" id="N75406">Nov. 8 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N75411">A further German advance into Roumania.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-11-10" id="N75414">Nov. 10 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N75419"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—The British make progress north of Thiepval.</p>
<p id="N75425">The Serbians make progress towards Monastir: Chuke heights and the village of Polag are captured.</p>
<p id="N75428">German destroyers shell the Russian coast near Reval.</p>
<p id="N75431">British naval aeroplanes bombard the harbours and submarine shelters at Zeebrugge and Ostend.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-11-11" id="N75434">Nov. 11 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N75439">The armed French transport <i><span class="vessel">Magellan</span></i> is sunk by a submarine in the Mediterranean.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-11-12" id="N75445">Nov. 12 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N75450"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—The French capture Saillisel.</p>
<p id="N75456">A further German advance into Roumania.</p>
<p id="N75459">The Serbians gain ground towards Monastir: 16 guns and 1000 prisoners are captured.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-11-13" id="N75462">Nov. 13 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N75467">The British attack astride the Ancre and capture St. Pierre Divion, Beaumont Hamel, and 3300 prisoners.</p>
<p id="N75470">The Germans continue to advance in Roumania.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-11-14" id="N75473">Nov. 14 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N75478">The British capture Beaucourt (on the Ancre Front).</p>
<p id="N75481">The Allies advance in Macedonia: the Bulgarians fall back on the Bystritza, five miles south of Monastir.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-11-15" id="N75484">Nov. 15 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N75489">The Germans advance rapidly in Roumania.</p>
<p id="N75492">British naval aeroplanes bombard the harbours and submarine shelters at Zeebrugge and Ostend.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-11-17" id="N75495">Nov. 17 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N75500">The end of the Battle of the Somme<span class="ref"> (see July 1)</span>.</p>
<p id="N75507">British airmen raid Zeebrugge and Ostend.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-11-18" id="N75510">Nov. 18 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N75515">A further British advance astride the Ancre.</p>
<p id="N75518">An important German victory in Roumania which breaks the Roumanian resistance.</p>
<p id="N75521"><span class="theatre">Macedonian Front</span>:—Monastir is recaptured by the Allies<span class="ref"> (see Dec. 5, 1915)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-11-21" id="N75531">Nov. 21 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N75536">Death of the Austrian Emperor, <span class="person">Francis Joseph</span>.</p>
<p id="N75539"><span class="theatre">Roumania</span>:—Craiova is captured by the Germans.</p>
<p id="N75545">The British hospital ship <i><span class="vessel">Britannic</span></i> is sunk by a mine or submarine in the Ægean Sea.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-11-23" id="N75551">Nov. 23 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N75556">Orsova is recaptured by the Austro-Germans<span class="ref"> (see Sept. 7)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-11-24" id="N75563">Nov. 24 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N75568">The Germans and Bulgarians under <span class="person">Mackensen</span> cross the Danube at several points from the Dobrudja.</p>
<p id="N75571">The British hospital ship <i><span class="vessel">Braemar Castle</span></i> is torpedoed in the Mediterranean; the vessel is subsequently salved and repaired.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-11-25" id="N75577">Nov. 25 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N75582"><span class="theatre">Roumania</span>:—The armies of <span class="person">Falkenhayn</span> and <span class="person">Mackensen</span> effect a junction north of the Danube.</p>
<p id="N75588">The French battleship <i><span class="vessel">Suffren</span></i> is sunk by a submarine in the Atlantic.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-11-26" id="N75594">Nov. 26 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N75599">The Allies demand of the Greek Government the surrender of ten mountain batteries.</p>
<p id="N75602">The Roumanians are in full retreat.</p>
<p id="N75605">A Serbian success north of Monastir: Hill 105 is captured.</p>
<p id="N75608">A German naval raid on Lowestoft.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-11-27" id="N75611">Nov. 27 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N75616">The Roumanian retreat continues: the line of the Aluta is abandoned; Giurgevo, on the Danube, is captured by the enemy.</p>
<p id="N75619">A Zeppelin raid on England: two Zeppelins are destroyed.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-11-28" id="N75622">Nov. 28 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N75627">A daylight raid on London by one German aeroplane.</p>
<p id="N75630">A British air-raid on the harbour at Zeebrugge.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-11-29" id="N75633">Nov. 29 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N75638">The appointments of <span class="person">Sir John Jellicoe</span> to the office of First Sea Lord<span class="ref"> (see May 28, 1915, and Dec. 26, 1917)</span> and of <span class="person">Sir David Beatty</span> to the command of the Grand Fleet are announced in Parliament.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-12-01" id="N75641">Dec. 1 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N75646"><span class="person">Mr. Lloyd George</span> makes proposals to <span class="person">Mr. Asquith</span> for the reform of war administration in Great Britain.</p>
<p id="N75649">The Allies' demands are rejected by the Greek Government; an Allied force which is landed at the Piræus is attacked by Greek troops.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-12-03" id="N75652">Dec. 3 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N75657"><span class="theatre">Roumania</span>:—A German victory in the Arges Valley; the Roumanian armies are driven back all along the line. The Serbians advance and carry high ground north-east of Monastir.</p>
<p id="N75663">A German submarine bombards Funchal (Madeira).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-12-04" id="N75666">Dec. 4 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N75671">The Serbians continue to advance north-east of Monastir; they capture Stravina.</p>
<p id="N75674">The British liner <i><span class="vessel">Caledonia</span></i> is sunk by a submarine in the Mediterranean.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-12-05" id="N75680">Dec. 5 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N75685">Resignation of <span class="person">Mr. Asquith</span>, British Prime Minister.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-12-06" id="N75688">Dec. 6 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N75693"><span class="theatre">Roumania</span>:—Bucharest and Ploesti are captured by the Germans.</p>
<p id="N75699"><span class="theatre">Greece</span>:—The Royalist party in Athens regains control of the posts and telegraphs.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-12-07" id="N75705">Dec. 7 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N75710"><span class="person">Mr. Lloyd George</span> becomes British Prime Minister.</p>
<p id="N75713"><span class="theatre">Roumania</span>:—The German successes continue; many prisoners are captured.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-12-08" id="N75719">Dec. 8 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N75724">A blockade of Greece is proclaimed by the Allies, as from this date, until adequate reparation shall be made for recent outrages.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-12-10" id="N75727">Dec. 10 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N75732">The formation of the new British Cabinet is announced. <span class="person">Mr. Balfour</span> becomes Foreign Secretary, <span class="person">Lord Derby</span> Secretary for War, <span class="person">Sir E. Carson</span> First Lord of the Admiralty, <span class="person">Mr. Chamberlain</span> Secretary for India, <span class="person">Lord Devonport</span> Food Controller; Minister of Munitions, <span class="person">Dr. Addison</span>; Minister of Blockade, <span class="person">Lord R. Cecil</span><span class="ref"> (see May 26, 1915, and July 17, 1917)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-12-11" id="N75739">Dec. 11 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N75744">An Allied Note is presented to Greece demanding the demobilisation of the Greek troops.</p>
<p id="N75747">The Roumanian retreat continues: enemy forces are 20 miles east of Ploesti.</p>
<p id="N75750">The Italian battleship <i><span class="vessel">Regina Margherita</span></i> is sunk by a mine in the Adriatic.</p>
<p id="N75756">A British air-raid on Zeebrugge.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-12-12" id="N75759">Dec. 12 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N75764">The German Chancellor announces that Germany has made proposals for peace.</p>
<p id="N75767"><span class="person">General Nivelle</span> succeeds <span class="person">General Joffre</span> in command of the armies in the field on the Western Front.</p>
<p id="N75770"><span class="person">Vice-Admiral Gauchet</span> succeeds <span class="person">Admiral du Fournet</span> in command of the Allied Fleets in the Mediterranean.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-12-13" id="N75773">Dec. 13 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N75778"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—A new offensive against Kut-el-Amara is launched by the British forces under <span class="person">General Sir Stanley Maude</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-12-14" id="N75784">Dec. 14 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N75789">The Allies present an ultimatum to Greece demanding the withdrawal of all Greek forces from Thessaly.</p>
<p id="N75792">The Roumanians evacuate Buzeu.</p>
<p id="N75795">The empty British transport <i><span class="vessel">Russia</span></i> is sunk by a submarine.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-12-15" id="N75801">Dec. 15 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N75806">The Greek Government accepts the ultimatum of the Allies.</p>
<p id="N75809">A brilliant French advance at Verdun: important positions and 7500 prisoners are taken.</p>
<p id="N75812"><span class="theatre">East Africa</span>:—A British victory near Kibata.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-12-16" id="N75818">Dec. 16 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N75823">The French advance at Verdun continues.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-12-18" id="N75826">Dec. 18 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N75831">Germany's peace proposals are received by the British Foreign Office<span class="ref"> (see Dec. 12 and 30)</span>.</p>
<p id="N75838">The end of the French offensive at Verdun<span class="ref"> (see Dec. 15)</span>, over 11,000 prisoners and 115 guns having been captured and much ground gained.</p>
<p id="N75845"><span class="theatre">Roumania</span>:—The Germans advancing on Braila, the grain port on the Danube, are checked by the Russians at Botogu.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-12-19" id="N75851">Dec. 19 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N75856"><span class="person">Mr. Lloyd George</span> announces the attitude of the British Government and of the Allies towards the German peace proposals: 'restitution, reparation, and a guarantee against repetition' are declared essential.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-12-20" id="N75859">Dec. 20 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N75864">A Peace Note from <span class="person">President Wilson</span> is communicated to the belligerents<span class="ref"> (see Dec. 25)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-12-21" id="N75871">Dec. 21 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N75876"><span class="theatre">Sinai Peninsula</span>:—The British occupy El Arish.</p>
<p id="N75882">The British destroyer <i><span class="vessel">Negro</span></i> is sunk by collision in the North Sea.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-12-23" id="N75888">Dec. 23 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N75893"><span class="theatre">Sinai Peninsula</span>:—The British capture the strong Turkish position of Magdhaba, near the Syrian border: 1300 prisoners and 7 guns are taken.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-12-25" id="N75899">Dec. 25 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N75904">Germany replies to <span class="person">President Wilson</span>'s Peace Note, ignoring his request for the statement of terms but proposing that Peace Delegates should be summoned immediately.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-12-26" id="N75907">Dec. 26 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N75912"><span class="person">General Joffre</span> is created a Marshal of France.</p>
<p id="N75915">The British take over more trench-line on the Western Front.</p>
<p id="N75918"><span class="theatre">Roumania</span>:—The Germans capture Rimnic-Sarat.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-12-27" id="N75924">Dec. 27 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N75929">The French battleship <i><span class="vessel">Gaulois</span></i> is sunk by a submarine in the Mediterranean.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-12-28" id="N75935">Dec. 28 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N75940"><span class="theatre">Roumania</span>:—Further German successes at Rimnic-Sarat: 10,000 prisoners are taken.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-12-29" id="N75946">Dec. 29 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N75951"><span class="person">Rasputin</span>, the notorious Russian monk, is assassinated.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1916-12-30" id="N75954">Dec. 30 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N75959">The Allies reply to the German peace proposals, which they describe as empty and insincere, with a direct negative<span class="ref"> (see Dec. 12 and 18)</span>.</p>
</div>

<hr class="chap"/>
<h2><a name="seventeen" id="seventeen">1917</a></h2>

<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-01-01" id="N75972">Jan. 1 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N75977"><span class="person">Sir Douglas Haig</span> is gazetted a Field Marshal.</p>
<p id="N75980"><span class="theatre">East Africa</span>:—The British storm a strong enemy position in the Mageta Valley and approach Kilambawe.</p>
<p id="N75986">The British transport <i><span class="vessel">Ivernia</span></i> is sunk by a submarine in the Mediterranean.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-01-02" id="N75992">Jan. 2 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N75997">The Roumanian Cabinet is reconstituted with <span class="person">M. Bratiano</span> as Premier.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-01-03" id="N76000">Jan. 3 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N76005">A Russian success in the Southern Bukovina (600 prisoners).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-01-04" id="N76008">Jan. 4 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N76013"><span class="theatre">East Africa</span>:—The British occupy the German camp on the Tshogowali River.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-01-05" id="N76019">Jan. 5 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N76024"><span class="theatre">Roumania</span>:—The Austro-Germans capture Braila.</p>
<p id="N76030"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—The Second Battle of Kut-el-Amara begins<span class="ref"> (see Feb. 24)</span>.</p>
<p id="N76040"><span class="theatre">East Africa</span>:—The British reach Kilambawe, on the north bank of the Rufiji River.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-01-07" id="N76046">Jan. 7 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N76051">The Russians make a successful advance near Riga.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-01-08" id="N76054">Jan. 8 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N76059">The Allies present an ultimatum to Greece repeating former demands<span class="ref"> (see Jan. 16)</span>.</p>
<p id="N76066"><span class="theatre">Roumania</span>:—The Austro-Germans capture Focsani and 5500 prisoners; the Sereth line is thus turned. The Dobrudja is finally evacuated by the Russians and Roumanians.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-01-09" id="N76072">Jan. 9 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N76077">The Allies reply to <span class="person">President Wilson</span>'s Note, stating their terms of peace.</p>
<p id="N76080">Resignation of <span class="person">M. Trepoff</span>, the Russian Premier; he is succeeded by <span class="person">M. Golitzine</span>.</p>
<p id="N76083">The Russians continue to advance in the Riga district.</p>
<p id="N76086"><span class="theatre">Syria</span>:—Australian mounted troops and the Imperial Camel Corps capture a strong enemy position at Rafa (the Battle of Rafa).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-01-11" id="N76092">Jan. 11 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N76097"><span class="theatre">The Ancre Front</span>:—The British capture the Beaumont Hamel spur.</p>
<p id="N76103"><span class="theatre">Roumania</span>:—Galatz is evacuated by the Russians: the conquest of Wallachia by the Germans is complete.</p>
<p id="N76109">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Cornwallis</span></i> (battleship) is sunk by a submarine off Malta. H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Ben-my-Chree</span></i> (aircraft carrier) is sunk in action off Asia Minor.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-01-12" id="N76118">Jan. 12 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N76123">Germany and Austria-Hungary reply through Neutrals to the Allied Note which refused to consider the German peace proposals.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-01-16" id="N76126">Jan. 16 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N76131">The Greek Government accepts in their entirety the demands of the Allies<span class="ref"> (see Jan. 8)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-01-17" id="N76138">Jan. 17 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N76143"><span class="theatre">Roumania</span>:—The enemy's advance is checked in the Moldavian Hills.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-01-19" id="N76149">Jan. 19 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N76154">An explosion at a munitions factory at Silvertown, in the East End of London (69 killed).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-01-20" id="N76157">Jan. 20 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N76162"><span class="theatre">Roumania</span>:—Fundeni, on the Sereth, is captured by the Germans.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-01-23" id="N76168">Jan. 23 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N76173">The Germans attack in the Riga district and compel the Russians to withdraw slightly.</p>
<p id="N76176">Two actions are fought in the North Sea between British and German light forces: a German destroyer and the British destroyer <i><span class="vessel">Simoon</span></i> are sunk.</p>
<p id="N76182">The British armed merchant cruiser <i><span class="vessel">Laurentic</span></i> is sunk by a mine off the Irish coast.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-01-24" id="N76188">Jan. 24 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N76193"><span class="theatre">East Africa</span>:—A small German force is isolated and compelled to surrender.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-01-25" id="N76199">Jan. 25 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N76204">The Greek Government offers a formal apology to the Allies for the events of December 1.</p>
<p id="N76207"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—A British attack on Turkish trenches south-west of Kut is partially successful.</p>
<p id="N76213">A German vessel shells Southwold at night: there are no casualties.</p>
<p id="N76216">The French transport <i><span class="vessel">Amiral Magon</span></i> is sunk by a submarine in the Mediterranean.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-01-26" id="N76222">Jan. 26 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N76227">To regulate exchange, the British Government by Order in Council enforces the sale or loan of foreign securities to the Treasury.</p>
<p id="N76230"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—The British complete the capture of the Turkish position attacked on the previous day.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-01-27" id="N76236">Jan. 27 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N76241">A Russian success in the Southern Bukovina: 1200 prisoners are captured.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-01-28" id="N76244">Jan. 28 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N76249"><span class="person">Lieut.-General Smuts</span> is succeeded by <span class="person">Major-General Hoskins</span> as British Commander-in-Chief in East Africa<span class="ref"> (see Feb. 10, 1916, and May 16, 1917)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-01-30" id="N76252">Jan. 30 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N76257">German attacks between Soissons and Rheims are repulsed.</p>
<p id="N76260"><span class="theatre">Riga Front</span>:—The Germans attack in strength: the Russians fall back slightly.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-01-31" id="N76266">Jan. 31 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N76271">Germany announces 'unrestricted naval warfare' as from February 1.</p>
<p id="N76274">The German intention to sink hospital ships is announced in a statement by the British Foreign Office.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-02-01" id="N76277">Feb. 1 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N76282">The Government of the U.S.A. is officially informed that Germany 'must abandon the limitations she has hitherto imposed upon herself in the employment of her fighting weapons at sea.'</p>
<p id="N76285"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—The British capture the last line but one of the Turkish trenches before Kut east of the Hai-Tigris junction.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-02-02" id="N76291">Feb. 2 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N76296">The Food Controller, <span class="person">Lord Devonport</span>, appeals to the British nation to economise in food as the only way to avoid compulsory rationing.</p>
<p id="N76299">A British naval air-raid on Bruges harbour.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-02-03" id="N76302">Feb. 3 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N76307">The Government of the U.S.A. breaks off diplomatic relations with Germany; <span class="person">Count Bernstorff</span> is handed his passports; <span class="person">Mr. Gerrard</span> is recalled from Berlin; interned German cruisers and Hamburg-Amerika liners are seized.</p>
<p id="N76310">The United States S.S. <i><span class="vessel">Housatonic</span></i> is sunk in daylight off the Scillies by a German submarine.</p>
<p id="N76316"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—The British capture three lines of Turkish trenches west of the Hai-Tigris junction.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-02-04" id="N76322">Feb. 4 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N76327"><span class="theatre">The Ancre Front</span>:—The British carry important enemy positions.</p>
<p id="N76333"><span class="person">President Wilson</span> invites other Neutral Powers to follow the example of the U.S.A. in the interests of peace and civilisation (<i><span class="vessel">i.e.</span></i> to break off diplomatic relations with Germany).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-02-05" id="N76339">Feb. 5 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N76344">The Swiss Government declines to follow <span class="person">President Wilson</span>'s advice to break off relations with Germany.</p>
<p id="N76347">Resignation of <span class="person">Said Kalim</span>; a new Turkish Cabinet is formed with <span class="person">Talaat Bey</span> as Grand Vizier.</p>
<p id="N76350"><span class="theatre">Western Egypt</span>:—The action of Siwa: the Senussi are defeated near the Siwa oasis.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-02-06" id="N76356">Feb. 6 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N76361"><span class="theatre">The Ancre Front</span>:—The British line is advanced near Grandcourt: 1000 yards of German trenches are taken.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-02-07" id="N76367">Feb. 7 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N76372"><span class="theatre">The Ancre Front</span>:—The British occupy Grandcourt.</p>
<p id="N76378">The <i><span class="vessel">California</span></i>, of the Anchor Line, is sunk by a German submarine with serious loss of life.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-02-08" id="N76384">Feb. 8 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N76389">The British advance from Grandcourt on both banks of the Ancre.</p>
<p id="N76392">The British destroyer <i><span class="vessel">Ghurka</span></i> is sunk by a mine in the English Channel.</p>
<p id="N76398">A British naval air-raid on Bruges harbour.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-02-09" id="N76401">Feb. 9 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N76406"><span class="theatre">The Isonzo Front</span>:—The Austrians attack and gain some ground east of Gorizia.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-02-10" id="N76412">Feb. 10 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N76417"><span class="theatre">The Ancre Front</span>:—The British capture a strong German position south of Serre Hill.</p>
<p id="N76423"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—The British storm Turkish trenches west of Kut and capture the 'Liquorice Factory.'</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-02-11" id="N76429">Feb. 11 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N76434">Germany attempts through the Swiss Government to reopen negotiations with the U.S.A.</p>
<p id="N76437">The Italian line is re-established east of Gorizia.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-02-12" id="N76440">Feb. 12 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N76445"><span class="person">President Wilson</span> refuses to negotiate with Germany until her proclamation of unrestricted sea-warfare is withdrawn.</p>
<p id="N76448"><span class="theatre">Roumanian Front</span>:—The Germans attack the Russians near Jacobeny with partial success.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-02-13" id="N76454">Feb. 13 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N76459"><span class="theatre">Roumanian Front</span>:—The Russians regain ground near Jacobeny, but the Germans renew their attack, and make further progress.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-02-14" id="N76465">Feb. 14 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N76470"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—<span class="person">General Maude</span> clears the Turks from the Dahra bend of the Tigris.</p>
<p id="N76476">A British naval air-raid on Bruges harbour.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-02-15" id="N76479">Feb. 15 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N76484">The Germans attack the French between Tahure and Massiges: they gain ground and capture 800 prisoners.</p>
<p id="N76487">The Italian transport <i><span class="vessel">Minas</span></i> is sunk by a submarine in the Mediterranean.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-02-16" id="N76493">Feb. 16 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N76498">A British naval air-raid on Bruges harbour.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-02-17" id="N76501">Feb. 17 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N76506">The British advance up the valley of the Ancre and capture important enemy positions.</p>
<p id="N76509"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—A British attack on the Sanna-i-Yat position fails.</p>
<p id="N76515">The French transport <i><span class="vessel">Athos</span></i> is sunk by a submarine in the Mediterranean.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-02-18" id="N76521">Feb. 18 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N76526">Italian and French forces effect a junction in Southern Albania, thereby cutting the communication between Greece and the Central Powers.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-02-20" id="N76529">Feb. 20 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N76534"><span class="theatre">Sinai Peninsula</span>:—The British capture two Turkish advanced posts.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-02-22" id="N76540">Feb. 22 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N76545"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—<span class="person">General Maude</span> again attacks the Sanna-i-Yat position: two lines of Turkish trenches are captured.</p>
<p id="N76551">Seven Dutch ships are attacked by a German submarine outside Falmouth and six of them are sunk.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-02-23" id="N76554">Feb. 23 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N76559">Minimum prices for wheat and oats are guaranteed for five years in Great Britain.</p>
<p id="N76562"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—<span class="person">General Maude</span>'s forces cross the Tigris at the Shamrun bend, threatening the Turkish line of retreat; the third and fourth Turkish lines are captured at Sanna-i-Yat.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-02-24" id="N76568">Feb. 24 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N76573">On the Ancre the Germans begin to retire from their front-line positions.</p>
<p id="N76576"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—<span class="person">General Maude</span> captures Kut-el-Amara; the Turks evacuate the Sanna-i-Yat position and retreat towards Baghdad; over 1700 prisoners are taken and much booty; this ends the Second Battle of Kut-el-Amara<span class="ref"> (see Jan. 5)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-02-25" id="N76586">Feb. 25 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N76591">On the Ancre, the Germans withdraw before the British: Serre, Miraumont, Warlencourt, and Pys are captured.</p>
<p id="N76594"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—The British advance-guard, in pursuit of the Turks, is 15 miles west of Kut.</p>
<p id="N76600">The Cunard liner <i><span class="vessel">Laconia</span></i> is sunk without warning in the Atlantic.</p>
<p id="N76606">German destroyers shell Margate and Broadstairs.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-02-26" id="N76609">Feb. 26 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N76614"><span class="theatre">The Ancre Front</span>:—The Germans retire before the British on an eleven-mile front: Le Barque is captured.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-02-27" id="N76620">Feb. 27 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N76625">The British occupy Gommecourt (on the left of the advance).</p>
<p id="N76628"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—The Turkish retreat becomes a rout; the British pursue with cavalry, infantry, and gunboats; the British gunboat <i><span class="vessel">Firefly</span></i>, lost on the fall of Kut, is recaptured.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-02-28" id="N76637">Feb. 28 (Wed.) (Relief of Ladysmith, 1900).</p>
<p id="N76642">The British capture Thilloy and advance east of Gommecourt.</p>
<p id="N76645">The Germans gain ground in the Southern Bukovina near the Dorna Watra Pass.</p>
<p id="N76648">The French destroyer <i><span class="vessel">Cassini</span></i> is sunk by a submarine in the Mediterranean (many lives lost).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-03-01" id="N76654">Mar. 1 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N76659"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—The Turks continue their disorderly retreat on Baghdad.</p>
<p id="N76665">The British destroyer <i><span class="vessel">Pheasant</span></i> is sunk by a floating mine off the Orkneys.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-03-02" id="N76671">Mar. 2 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N76676"><span class="theatre">The Somme and Ancre Fronts</span>:—The British continue to advance against the yielding enemy.</p>
<p id="N76682"><span class="theatre">Persia</span>:—Hamadan is captured by the Russians.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-03-03" id="N76688">Mar. 3 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N76693">The Germans retreat to a depth of five miles east of Gommecourt.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-03-04" id="N76696">Mar. 4 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N76701">The British capture German trenches at Bouchavesnes.</p>
<p id="N76704"><span class="theatre">Verdun</span>:—The Germans attack and gain ground north of Caurières Wood.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-03-05" id="N76710">Mar. 5 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N76715">The British approach the German main positions on the Bapaume Ridge.</p>
<p id="N76718"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—British cavalry reach Lajj, twenty-seven miles from Baghdad.</p>
<p id="N76724"><span class="theatre">Persia</span>:—The Turks retreating from Hamadan are attacked by the Russians in the Asadabad Pass.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-03-06" id="N76730">Mar. 6 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N76735"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—<span class="person">General Maude</span>'s rapid advance on Baghdad continues.</p>
<p id="N76741"><span class="theatre">Persia</span>:—The Russians capture the Asadabad Pass.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-03-07" id="N76747">Mar. 7 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N76752"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—The Turks stand on the line of the Dialah River.</p>
<p id="N76758">The Turks continue to retreat before the Russians in Western Persia.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-03-08" id="N76761">Mar. 8 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N76766">Death of <span class="person">Count Zeppelin</span>.</p>
<p id="N76769">A French advance in Champagne.</p>
<p id="N76772"><span class="theatre">Roumania</span>:—The Austro-Germans attack in the Trotus Valley (the centre of the Moldavian Front) and gain high ground.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-03-09" id="N76778">Mar. 9 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N76783">Serious food riots are reported in Petrograd.</p>
<p id="N76786"><span class="theatre">Verdun</span>:—A French success near Caurières Wood.</p>
<p id="N76792"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—<span class="person">General Maude</span> forces a crossing of the Dialah River.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-03-10" id="N76798">Mar. 10 (Sat.) Neuve Chapelle, 1915.</p>
<p id="N76803"><span class="theatre">The Ancre Front</span>:—The British capture Irles.</p>
<p id="N76809"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—The Turkish resistance before Baghdad is broken; the British advance upon the city.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-03-11" id="N76815">Mar. 11 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N76820"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—The British capture Baghdad, and continue to pursue the Turks.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-03-12" id="N76826">Mar. 12 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N76831">Revolution in Russia: the Duma, which demands representative Government, is prorogued; a number of regiments join the cause of the Duma; troops refuse to fire on the rioters; the Cabinet resigns; the Duma elects a Provisional Government.</p>
<p id="N76834"><span class="theatre">Macedonia</span>:—The British advance near Lake Doiran.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-03-13" id="N76840">Mar. 13 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N76845">China breaks off diplomatic relations with Germany.</p>
<p id="N76848">The Germans abandon the forward slopes of the Bapaume Ridge; the British capture Loupart Wood and Grévillers.</p>
<p id="N76851"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—The British are thirty miles beyond Baghdad.</p>
<p id="N76857"><span class="theatre">Persia</span>:—The Russians again capture Kermanshah<span class="ref"> (see July 2, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-03-14" id="N76867">Mar. 14 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N76872">The constitution of the Russian Provisional Government is announced: <span class="person">Prince Lvoff</span> is Premier.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-03-15" id="N76875">Mar. 15 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N76880">The Russian Provisional Government demands the abdication of the Tsar. The Tsar abdicates for himself and the Tsarevitch, and names his brother, the Grand Duke Michael, as Regent.</p>
<p id="N76883">The British destroyer <i><span class="vessel">Foyle</span></i> is sunk by a mine in the Straits of Dover.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-03-16" id="N76889">Mar. 16 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N76894">The British occupy St. Pierre Vaast Wood.</p>
<p id="N76897">A Zeppelin raid on Kent: one Zeppelin, returning from the raid, is brought down in France.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-03-17" id="N76900">Mar. 17 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N76905">Resignation of <span class="person">M. Briand</span>, the French Premier, and his Cabinet<span class="ref"> (see Oct. 28, 1915)</span>.</p>
<p id="N76912">The Germans retreat in France on a front of nearly a hundred miles; Bapaume, Chaulnes, and fourteen villages north and south of the Somme are occupied by the British; further south the French occupy Lassigny, Roye, and many villages.</p>
<p id="N76915"><span class="theatre">Persia</span>:—The Russians occupy Kerind.</p>
<p id="N76921">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Mignonette</span></i> (sloop) is sunk by a mine off the south-west coast of Ireland.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-03-18" id="N76927">Mar. 18 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N76932">The British advance on a front of forty-five miles and occupy Péronne and Nesle; the French advance on a front of thirty-seven miles and occupy Noyon and many villages.</p>
<p id="N76935"><span class="theatre">The Caucasus</span>:—Van is occupied by the Russians for the third time.</p>
<p id="N76941">German destroyers shell Ramsgate. Two British destroyers are torpedoed (one of them, the <i><span class="vessel">Paragon</span></i>, is sunk) in the Straits of Dover.</p>
<p id="N76947">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Alyssum</span></i> (sloop) is sunk by a mine off the south-west coast of Ireland.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-03-19" id="N76953">Mar. 19 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N76958">A new French Cabinet is formed with <span class="person">M. Ribot</span> as Premier<span class="ref"> (see Sept. 7)</span>.</p>
<p id="N76965">The German retreat continues; Ham and Chauny are occupied by the French.</p>
<p id="N76968"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—Feluja, on the Euphrates, is captured by the British.</p>
<p id="N76974">The French battleship <i><span class="vessel">Danton</span></i> is torpedoed and sunk in the Mediterranean (many lives lost).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-03-20" id="N76980">Mar. 20 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N76985">The French and British advance on an eighty-mile front, the British towards Cambrai and St. Quentin, the French towards La Fère and Laon.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-03-21" id="N76988">Mar. 21 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N76993">The British advance towards St. Quentin and occupy forty villages; the French capture Jussy and force the passage of the Crozat Canal.</p>
<p id="N76996">The British hospital ship <i><span class="vessel">Asturias</span></i> is sunk without warning by a German submarine (midnight, 20-21).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-03-22" id="N77002">Mar. 22 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N77007">The French cross the Crozat Canal and the Ailette.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-03-23" id="N77010">Mar. 23 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N77015">The French gain ground against fierce resistance between St. Quentin and La Fère; the Germans flood the region round La Fère.</p>
<p id="N77018">The raider <i><span class="vessel">Möwe</span></i> is reported to have returned to Germany for the second time<span class="ref"> (see March 4, 1916)</span>.</p>
<p id="N77024">The British destroyer <i><span class="vessel">Laforey</span></i> is sunk by a mine in the English Channel.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-03-24" id="N77030">Mar. 24 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N77035">The new Russian Government is officially recognised by Great Britain, France, and the United States.</p>
<p id="N77038">The British occupy Roisel, seven miles east of Péronne. The French reach the western bank of the Oise between St. Quentin and La Fère.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-03-25" id="N77041">Mar. 25 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N77046">The French Government addresses to Neutrals a protest against the devastation and barbarities committed by the Germans in the evacuated territories.</p>
<p id="N77049">German torpedo-boats bombard Dunkirk.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-03-26" id="N77052">Mar. 26 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N77057">The British capture Lagnicourt (north-east of Bapaume), the French Coucy-le-Château and Folembray.</p>
<p id="N77060"><span class="theatre">Macedonia</span>:—The French advance west of Monastir: 2000 prisoners are taken.</p>
<p id="N77066">The British destroyer <i><span class="vessel">Myrmidon</span></i> is sunk by a mine in the English Channel.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-03-27" id="N77072">Mar. 27 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N77077">The British occupy Longavines, Lièrmont, Villiers, Equancourt, and Saulcourt; the French capture the forest of Lower Coucy.</p>
<p id="N77080"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—The British forces under <span class="person">Sir A. Murray</span> defeat the Turks near Gaza (the First Battle of Gaza): 900 prisoners are captured, including the General of a Division and his Staff.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-03-28" id="N77086">Mar. 28 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N77091"><span class="theatre">Verdun</span>:—The French recapture Hill 304.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-03-29" id="N77097">Mar. 29 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N77102">The British make progress south-east of Bapaume.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-03-30" id="N77105">Mar. 30 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N77110">The British advance towards Cambrai and capture Sorel, Heudicourt, Soyécourt, and other places; the French advance north-east of Soissons.</p>
<p id="N77113">The British hospital ship <i><span class="vessel">Gloucester Castle</span></i> is torpedoed and sunk in mid-Channel, but without loss of life.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-03-31" id="N77119">Mar. 31 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N77124">The British advance north-west of St. Quentin and capture Jeancourt, Hervilly, Herbecourt, and Vendelles.</p>
<p id="N77127"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—The British occupy Deli Abbas.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-04-01" id="N77133">April 1 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N77138">The British capture Savy Wood and Savy, near St. Quentin, and Epéhy and Peizières, on the Bapaume Railway; the French advance towards Laon on the Margival-Vrégny Front.</p>
<p id="N77141">The Russians occupy Khanikin (north-east of Baghdad).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-04-02" id="N77144">April 2 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N77149"><span class="person">President Wilson</span> asks Congress for a declaration that 'a state of war exists.'</p>
<p id="N77152">The British take Holnon Wood (two miles from St. Quentin) and Francilly-Selency and Selency; they also advance on a ten-mile front between Bapaume and Arras and capture Croissilles and Doignies.</p>
<p id="N77155">The American armed liner <i><span class="vessel">Aztec</span></i> is torpedoed off the French coast.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-04-03" id="N77161">April 3 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N77166">The British gain ground south-east of Arras; the French advance between St. Quentin and La Fère.</p>
<p id="N77169">The Germans defeat the Russians on the Stokhod; they win a bridge-head and take many prisoners.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-04-04" id="N77172">April 4 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N77177">The U.S.A. Senate resolves that a state of war with Germany exists by a majority of 82 votes to 6.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-04-05" id="N77180">April 5 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N77185">The U.S.A. House of Representatives resolves that a state of war with Germany exists by a majority of 373 votes to 50. The sanction of Congress having thus been obtained, <span class="person">President Wilson</span> subsequently declares the United States of America to be at war with Germany.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-04-07" id="N77188">April 7 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N77193">Cuba declares war against Germany.</p>
<p id="N77196">Two German destroyers are torpedoed off Zeebrugge, one of them being sunk.</p>
<p id="N77199">The British torpedo gunboat <i><span class="vessel">Jason</span></i> is sunk by a mine off the west coast of Scotland.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-04-08" id="N77205">April 8 (Easter Sunday)</p>
<p id="N77210">Austria breaks off diplomatic relations with the United States.</p>
<p id="N77213"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—The British capture Belad Station, and occupy the left bank of the Shatt-el-Adhaim.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-04-09" id="N77219">April 9 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N77224">Brazil breaks off diplomatic relations with Germany.</p>
<p id="N77227">The First Battle of Arras begins: the British advance on a fifteen-mile front between Lens and Arras, and capture the Vimy Ridge with 6000 prisoners<span class="ref"> (see May 16)</span>. On the Bapaume-Cambrai road they take Deniécourt and Havrincourt Wood, and, north of St. Quentin, Fresnoy-le-Petit, Pontru, and Le Vergnier.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-04-10" id="N77234">April 10 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N77239">The British continue to advance: they reach the outskirts of Monchy-le-Preux, and capture Louveval.</p>
<p id="N77242">The British hospital ship <i><span class="vessel">Salta</span></i> is sunk by a mine in the English Channel.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-04-11" id="N77248">April 11 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N77253">The British capture Monchy-le-Preux and La Bergère.</p>
<p id="N77256">The French advance east and north-east of Soissons.</p>
<p id="N77259"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—<span class="person">General Maude</span> defeats the Turks with heavy loss near Deltawa.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-04-12" id="N77265">April 12 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N77270">The British advance on Lens; south of the Scarpe, Wancourt and Heninel are carried with the aid of tanks; Gouzeaucourt is captured.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-04-13" id="N77273">April 13 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N77278">Bolivia breaks off diplomatic relations with Germany.</p>
<p id="N77281">On the fifty-mile front between Loos and west of Cambrai the British take a number of important villages, including Vimy and Givenchy-en-Gohelle; south of the Scarpe they capture a portion of the Hindenburg line. The French attack and gain ground south of St. Quentin.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-04-14" id="N77284">April 14 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N77289">The British capture Liévin (the western suburb of Lens), Cité St. Pierre (north-west of Lens), and Gricourt (near St. Quentin).</p>
<p id="N77292">An Allied air-raid on Freiburg, as a reprisal for the sinking of hospital ships.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-04-15" id="N77295">April 15 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N77300">German counter-attacks are repulsed by the British.</p>
<p id="N77303">The British transports <i><span class="vessel">Cameronia</span></i> (140 lives lost) and <i><span class="vessel">Arcadian</span></i> (279 lives lost) are sunk by submarine in the Mediterranean.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-04-16" id="N77312">April 16 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N77317">The Second Battle of the Aisne begins<span class="ref"> (see May 20)</span>: the French attack on the front Soissons to Rheims; the German first positions are carried from Soissons to Craonne, the German first and second positions from Craonne to Juvincourt; 17,000 prisoners and 130 guns are taken.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-04-17" id="N77324">April 17 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N77329">The French capture Auberive and carry the heights south of Moronvilliers.</p>
<p id="N77332"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—The British attack and carry Turkish first-line positions on a six-mile front (the Second Battle of Gaza).</p>
<p id="N77338"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—<span class="person">General Maude</span> forces the passage of the Shatt-el-Adhaim below Samarra.</p>
<p id="N77344">The British hospital ships <i><span class="vessel">Donegal</span></i> and <i><span class="vessel">Lanfranc</span></i> are sunk in the English Channel without warning; 75 persons (mostly wounded), including 15 wounded Germans, are drowned.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-04-18" id="N77353">April 18 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N77358">The British capture Villers-Guislan, 12 miles south of Cambrai.</p>
<p id="N77361">The French continue to advance on the Aisne: Chavonne, Chivy, and Ostell are captured.</p>
<p id="N77364"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—The Turkish 18th Army Corps is annihilated by <span class="person">General Maude</span> at Istabulat, 12 miles south-east of Samarra.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-04-19" id="N77370">April 19 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N77375">The French capture positions east and west of the Vrégny salient, and advance east of Rheims.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-04-20" id="N77378">April 20 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N77383">The British capture Gonnelieu, 8 miles south-west of Cambrai.</p>
<p id="N77386"><span class="theatre">The Aisne Front</span>:—The French continue to advance on the Chemin-des-Dames.</p>
<p id="N77392">Five German destroyers raid Dover; they are engaged by the British destroyers <i><span class="vessel">Broke</span></i> and <i><span class="vessel">Swift</span></i>, and two of them are sunk (the loss being subsequently admitted by the German Admiralty).</p>
<p id="N77401">A German destroyer shells Calais.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-04-21" id="N77404">April 21 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N77409"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—The Turks evacuate Istabulat; the British attack their new positions between Istabulat and Samarra.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-04-22" id="N77415">April 22 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N77420">The British gain ground east of Havrincourt Wood.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-04-23" id="N77423">April 23 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N77428">The British advance north and south of the Scarpe on a front of 12,000 yards; Gavrelle, Guémappe, and the German positions for 2½ miles further south are captured.</p>
<p id="N77431">German counter-attacks fail to drive the French from the heights south of Moronvilliers.</p>
<p id="N77434"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—Samarra station is occupied by the British.</p>
<p id="N77440">Three British aeroplanes attack five German destroyers off the Belgian coast: a German destroyer is sunk.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-04-24" id="N77443">April 24 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N77448"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—<span class="person">General Maude</span> attacks on the west bank of the Shatt-el-Adhaim; the Turks retreat to the Jebel Hamrin range.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-04-25" id="N77454">April 25 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N77459"><span class="theatre">Macedonia</span>:—The British advance on the Doiran Front.</p>
<p id="N77465">A German flotilla bombards Dunkirk.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-04-26" id="N77468">April 26 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N77473">A German counter-attack at Gavrelle is repulsed by the British; German counter-attacks on the Chemin-des-Dames are repulsed by the French.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-04-27" id="N77476">April 27 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N77481">Guatemala breaks off diplomatic relations with Germany.</p>
<p id="N77484">The British transport <i><span class="vessel">Ballarat</span></i>, carrying Australian troops, is torpedoed and sunk, but all hands are saved.</p>
<p id="N77490">Ramsgate is shelled by German destroyers (5 casualties).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-04-28" id="N77493">April 28 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N77498">The United States Congress passes by large majorities a Bill for raising an American army by compulsory service.</p>
<p id="N77501">The British advance east of the Vimy Ridge and astride the Scarpe: Arleux is captured.</p>
<p id="N77504">The French offensive on the Aisne is checked.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-04-29" id="N77507">April 29 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N77512">The British approach the Oppy line; they capture a mile of German trenches and 976 prisoners; fierce German counter-attacks are repulsed.</p>
<p id="N77515"><span class="person">General Pétain</span> is appointed Chief of the French Staff.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-04-30" id="N77518">April 30 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N77523"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—<span class="person">General Maude</span> defeats the 13th Turkish Army Corps at the gorge of the Shatt-el-Adhaim (where the river cuts the Jebel Hamrin range).</p>
<p id="N77529">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Tulip</span></i> (sloop—employed as Special Service ship) is sunk by a submarine in the Atlantic.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-05-01" id="N77535">May 1 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N77540">The French advance east of Rheims.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-05-02" id="N77543">May 2 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N77548">In Great Britain a Royal Proclamation is issued, exhorting the nation to food economy.</p>
<p id="N77551">The British destroyer <i><span class="vessel">Derwent</span></i> is sunk by a mine in the English Channel (52 lives lost).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-05-03" id="N77557">May 3 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N77562">A new Greek Cabinet is formed: Premier, <span class="person">M. Zaimis</span><span class="ref"> (see Sept 11, 1916, and June 23, 1917)</span>.</p>
<p id="N77565">The British attack on a sixteen-mile front east of Arras; the Canadians take Fresnoy, east of Vimy<span class="ref"> (see May 8)</span>; the Hindenburg 'switch' line is broken near Queant, and the Hindenburg line as far as Oppy is carried; counter-attacks by two divisions of the Prussian Guard are repulsed; 928 prisoners are captured.</p>
<p id="N77572"><span class="theatre">The Caucasus</span>:—Mush is abandoned by the Russians<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 24, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-05-04" id="N77582">May 4 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N77587">The British gain ground near St. Quentin and Hargicourt; the French take Craonne, carry German trenches on a front of 2½ miles, and capture 1000 prisoners.</p>
<p id="N77590">The British transport <i><span class="vessel">Transylvania</span></i> is sunk by a submarine in the Mediterranean (over 400 lives lost).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-05-05" id="N77596">May 5 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N77601"><span class="theatre">Russia</span>:—The Council of Workmen's and Soldiers' Delegates passes a vote of confidence in the Provisional Government by a narrow majority.</p>
<p id="N77607">The French advance on a front of 20 miles north of the Aisne and capture important ground towards Laon; they carry the Chemin-des-Dames and the crest of the Craonne Ridge; over 6000 prisoners are taken.</p>
<p id="N77610">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Lavender</span></i> (sloop) is sunk by a submarine in the English Channel.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-05-06" id="N77616">May 6 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N77621">German counter-attacks on the Aisne Front are repulsed, and the French capture 2000 more prisoners.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-05-07" id="N77624">May 7 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N77629">A German attack on the British near Lens is repulsed.</p>
<p id="N77632">A German aeroplane raid on north-east London in the early morning (1 killed).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-05-08" id="N77635">May 8 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N77640">Liberia breaks off diplomatic relations with Germany.</p>
<p id="N77643">The Germans attack in strength and recapture Fresnoy from the British<span class="ref"> (see May 3)</span>.</p>
<p id="N77650">The French carry an enemy position beyond Chevreux (north-east of Craonne).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-05-09" id="N77653">May 9 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N77658">A resolution is passed by the Russian Committee of Workmen's and Soldiers' Delegates in favour of an International Socialist Peace Conference to be held at Stockholm<span class="ref"> (see May 28)</span>.</p>
<p id="N77665"><span class="theatre">Macedonia</span>:—The British advance near Lake Doiran.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-05-10" id="N77671">May 10 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N77676">A scouting force of light cruisers and destroyers under <span class="person">Commodore Tyrwhitt</span> engage 11 enemy destroyers off Harwich, and chase them back to Zeebrugge.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-05-12" id="N77679">May 12 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N77684"><span class="theatre">Arras Front</span>:—The British capture important enemy positions and the greater part of Bullecourt<span class="ref"> (see May 17)</span>.</p>
<p id="N77694">Zeebrugge is bombarded by British naval forces.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-05-14" id="N77697">May 14 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N77702"><span class="theatre">Great Britain</span>:—<span class="person">Sir Eric Geddes</span> is appointed Controller at the Admiralty.</p>
<p id="N77708">The British gain ground north of Gavrelle, and capture Rœux.</p>
<p id="N77711"><span class="theatre">The Isonzo Front</span>:—The Italians assume the offensive from Gorizia to Plava.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-05-15" id="N77717">May 15 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N77722"><span class="person">General Pétain</span> succeeds <span class="person">General Nivelle</span> as Commander-in-Chief of the French army; he is succeeded by <span class="person">General Foch</span> as Chief of Staff.</p>
<p id="N77725"><span class="theatre">The Isonzo Front</span>:—The Italians advance on the slopes of Monte Santo.</p>
<p id="N77731">British naval forces destroy the Zeppelin <span class="notation">L 22</span> in the North Sea.</p>
<p id="N77734">An Austrian naval force sinks 14 British drifters in the Adriatic and escapes to harbour.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-05-16" id="N77737">May 16 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N77742">It is announced that <span class="person">Major-General J. L. van Deventer</span> is appointed to supreme command in East Africa, in succession to <span class="person">Major-General Hoskins</span><span class="ref"> (see Jan. 28)</span>.</p>
<p id="N77749"><span class="theatre">Russia</span>:—<span class="person">M. Miliukoff</span> resigns: a Coalition Government is formed, with <span class="person">Prince Lvoff</span> as Premier and <span class="person">M. Kerenski</span> as War Minister.</p>
<p id="N77755">The end of the First Battle of Arras<span class="ref"> (see April 9)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-05-17" id="N77762">May 17 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N77767">Honduras breaks off diplomatic relations with Germany.</p>
<p id="N77770">The British complete the capture of Bullecourt on the Siegfried line<span class="ref"> (see May 12)</span>.</p>
<p id="N77777"><span class="theatre">The Isonzo Front</span>:—The Italians win the western slopes of Monte Santo.</p>
<p id="N77783">U.S.A. destroyers reach British waters.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-05-18" id="N77786">May 18 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N77791"><span class="theatre">The Isonzo Front</span>:—The Italians win the highest peak of Monte Vodice.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-05-19" id="N77797">May 19 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N77802">Nicaragua breaks off diplomatic relations with Germany.</p>
<p id="N77805">The Russian Coalition Government issues a declaration repudiating a separate peace.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-05-20" id="N77808">May 20 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N77813">The French advance near Moronvilliers and take 1000 prisoners: the end of the Second Battle of the Aisne<span class="ref"> (see April 16)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-05-22" id="N77820">May 22 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N77825">The Hungarian Premier, <span class="person">Count Tisza</span>, resigns.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-05-23" id="N77828">May 23 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N77833"><span class="theatre">The Isonzo Front</span>:—The Italians advance on a wide front on the Southern Carso, and capture important positions and 9000 prisoners.</p>
<p id="N77839">A Zeppelin raid on East Anglia.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-05-24" id="N77842">May 24 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N77847"><span class="theatre">The Isonzo Front</span>:—The Italians make further progress on the Southern Carso.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-05-25" id="N77853">May 25 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N77858"><span class="theatre">The Isonzo Front</span>:—The Italians continue to advance on the Southern Carso.</p>
<p id="N77864">A raid by 17 German aeroplanes on Folkestone; three German aeroplanes are brought down on the return journey by British naval airmen from Dunkirk.</p>
<p id="N77867">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Hilary</span></i> (armed merchant cruiser) is sunk by a submarine in the Atlantic.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-05-26" id="N77873">May 26 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N77878">The British hospital ship <i><span class="vessel">Dover Castle</span></i> is sunk by a submarine in the Mediterranean (6 lives lost).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-05-27" id="N77884">May 27 (Whit Sunday)</p>
<p id="N77889"><span class="theatre">The Isonzo Front</span>:—The Italians reach the third Austrian line of defence; San Giovanni is captured.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-05-28" id="N77895">May 28 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N77900">French Socialists resolve to attend the Stockholm Conference<span class="ref"> (see June 1)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-05-29" id="N77907">May 29 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N77912">The French liner <i><span class="vessel">Yarra</span></i> is sunk by a submarine in the Mediterranean.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-05-31" id="N77918">May 31 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N77923">The Austrian Reichsrath is summoned for the first time during the war; the new Emperor Charles promises a more liberal constitution after the war.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-06-01" id="N77926">June 1 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N77931"><span class="theatre">Great Britain</span>:—<span class="person">Lord Devonport</span> resigns the office of Food Controller<span class="ref"> (see June 15)</span>.</p>
<p id="N77941">The French Premier, <span class="person">M. Ribot</span>, announces the refusal of his Government to allow French Socialists to attend the Stockholm Conference<span class="ref"> (see May 9 and Aug. 13)</span>.</p>
<p id="N77948">British naval aeroplanes bomb the German bases at Bruges, Ostend, and Zeebrugge.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-06-02" id="N77951">June 2 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N77956">The British transport <i><span class="vessel">Cameronian</span></i> is sunk by a submarine in the Mediterranean (63 lives lost).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-06-03" id="N77962">June 3 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N77967">Great Allied air-raids on the German aerodromes at Zeebrugge, St. Denis Westrom, and Bruges.</p>
<p id="N77970">A French air-raid on Trèves, as a reprisal for the bombardment of Bar-le-Duc.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-06-04" id="N77973">June 4 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N77978">Resignation of <span class="person">General Alexeieff</span> as Russian Commander-in-Chief; he is succeeded by <span class="person">General Brussiloff</span><span class="ref"> (see Aug. 1)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-06-05" id="N77985">June 5 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N77990">An action at long range between British light cruisers and destroyers, under <span class="person">Commodore Tyrwhitt</span>, and six German destroyers; one German destroyer, the <span class="notation">S20</span>, is sunk by gunfire.</p>
<p id="N77993">Ostend is bombarded by British naval forces.</p>
<p id="N77996">A daylight raid by 18 German aeroplanes on the south-eastern counties of England; two German aeroplanes are destroyed.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-06-07" id="N77999">June 7 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N78004">A British offensive is launched between Ypres and Armentières (the Battle of Messines; see June 14): an attack in strength on the Messines-Wytschaete Ridge is preceded by the explosion of 19 mines; Messines, the Messines Ridge, the village of Oosttaverne, and the enemy's positions on a front of 9 miles are captured, with 7000 prisoners and many guns.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-06-08" id="N78007">June 8 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N78012">The German proposal of an armistice on the Eastern Front is rejected by the Russian Government.</p>
<p id="N78015"><span class="person">General Pershing</span>, Commander-in-Chief of the United States Expeditionary Force, arrives in London.</p>
<p id="N78018">German counter-attacks in the Messines area are repulsed.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-06-10" id="N78021">June 10 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N78026">Publication of <span class="person">President Wilson</span>'s message to the Russian Government, defining the war aims of the U.S.A.</p>
<p id="N78029">The Italian offensive on the Isonzo Front ends, but between the Brenta and the Adige the Italians attack and capture the Agnello Pass and the greater part of Monte Ortigara.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-06-11" id="N78032">June 11 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N78037"><span class="theatre">Greece</span>:—<span class="person">King Constantine</span> abdicates, as demanded by the Allies, in favour of his second son <span class="person">Alexander</span>.</p>
<p id="N78043">The British gain ground on the right of their new front south-east of Ypres.</p>
<p id="N78046">A British drifter destroys two German seaplanes in the Channel.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-06-12" id="N78049">June 12 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N78054">A British naval force captures the Turkish fortress of Saliff, on the Arabian shore of the Red Sea.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-06-13" id="N78057">June 13 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N78062"><span class="theatre">The Trentino Front</span>:—An Austrian attack on Monte Ortigara is repulsed by the Italians.</p>
<p id="N78068">A daylight raid by 15 German aeroplanes on London: 157 persons are killed, 432 injured; one enemy machine is destroyed.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-06-14" id="N78071">June 14 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N78076">The end of the Battle of Messines<span class="ref"> (see June 7)</span>.</p>
<p id="N78083">The British storm Infantry Hill, east of Monchy.</p>
<p id="N78086">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Avenger</span></i> (armed merchant cruiser) is sunk by a submarine in the North Atlantic.</p>
<p id="N78092">The Zeppelin <span class="notation">L 43</span> is destroyed in the North Sea by British naval forces.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-06-15" id="N78095">June 15 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N78100"><span class="person">Lord Rhondda</span> is appointed Food Controller in Great Britain<span class="ref"> (see July 3, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p id="N78107">The British capture further portions of the Hindenburg line near Bullecourt.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-06-16" id="N78110">June 16 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N78115"><span class="theatre">Macedonia</span>:—The British withdraw to the west of the Struma, owing to the approach of the malarial season.</p>
<p id="N78121">Two Zeppelins raid the south-east of England; one is brought down in flames.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-06-17" id="N78124">June 17 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N78129">The Italians make local progress on the Carso, and repulse Austrian attacks on the Asiago Plateau.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-06-19" id="N78132">June 19 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N78137"><span class="theatre">Great Britain</span>:—Enemy titles held by members of the Royal Family are abolished by the King.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-06-20" id="N78143">June 20 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N78148">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Salvia</span></i> (sloop—employed as Special Service ship) is sunk by a submarine off the west coast of Ireland.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-06-23" id="N78154">June 23 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N78159"><span class="theatre">Greece</span>:—<span class="person">M. Zaimis</span>, the Greek Premier, resigns<span class="ref"> (see May 3)</span>.</p>
<p id="N78169">The P. &amp; O. liner <i><span class="vessel">Mongolia</span></i> is sunk by a mine off Bombay (23 lives lost).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-06-24" id="N78175">June 24 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N78180"><span class="person">Dr. von Seidler</span> forms a new Austrian Ministry<span class="ref"> (see Jan. 22, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p id="N78187">The British gain ground south-west of Lens.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-06-25" id="N78190">June 25 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N78195">British and German delegates meet at the Hague to discuss questions relating to prisoners of war.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-06-26" id="N78198">June 26 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N78203">A new Greek Cabinet is formed with <span class="person">M. Venizelos</span> as Premier.</p>
<p id="N78206">The first fighting troops of the American army reach France<span class="ref"> (see Oct. 27)</span>.</p>
<p id="N78213">The British gain ground south-west of Lens astride the Souchez River.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-06-27" id="N78216">June 27 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N78221"><span class="theatre">Great Britain</span>:—The report of the Commission on the Mesopotamian campaign is published.</p>
<p id="N78227">The British transport <i><span class="vessel">Armadale</span></i> is sunk by a submarine in the Atlantic (11 lives lost).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-06-28" id="N78233">June 28 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N78238">The British enter Avion (south of Lens), and capture German trenches near Oppy.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-06-29" id="N78241">June 29 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N78246">It is announced that <span class="person">General Allenby</span> is appointed to succeed <span class="person">General Murray</span> in command of the British forces in Egypt and Palestine.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-06-30" id="N78249">June 30 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N78254">The British make further progress south-west and south of Lens.</p>
<p id="N78257"><span class="theatre">East Africa</span>:—German forces are driven from the border of Nyasaland to the Rovuma border.</p>
<p id="N78263">The British destroyer <i><span class="vessel">Cheerful</span></i> is sunk by a mine off the Shetland Islands.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-07-01" id="N78269">July 1 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N78274">A great Russian offensive is launched in Eastern Galicia: important enemy positions and over 10,000 prisoners are captured.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-07-02" id="N78277">July 2 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N78282">The Russians make further progress in Galicia.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-07-03" id="N78285">July 3 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N78290">A German attack on the French lines between Jouy and Craonne is repulsed with heavy loss.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-07-04" id="N78293">July 4 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N78298">The United States Navy Department announces that an attack on American transports by German submarines was beaten off by American destroyers, and that at least one of the enemy submarines was sunk.</p>
<p id="N78301">A German aeroplane raid on Harwich (11 killed): two of the raiders are destroyed.</p>
<p id="N78304">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Aster</span></i> (sloop) is sunk by a mine in the Mediterranean.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-07-06" id="N78310">July 6 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N78315"><span class="person">Herr Erzberger</span>'s demand in the Reichstag for 'a peace without annexations or indemnities' provokes a political crisis in Germany.</p>
<p id="N78318">A Conscription Bill is carried in the Canadian House of Commons.</p>
<p id="N78321">The Russian advance in Galicia develops in the direction of Stanislau.</p>
<p id="N78324">The British destroyer <i><span class="vessel">Itchen</span></i> is sunk by a submarine in the North Sea (8 lives lost).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-07-07" id="N78330">July 7 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N78335">A daylight raid on London by 22 German aeroplanes: 59 persons are killed and 193 injured; four of the raiders are destroyed on the return journey.</p>
<p id="N78338">French air-raids on Essen and other German towns, as a reprisal for enemy raids on Nancy and Eperney.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-07-08" id="N78341">July 8 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N78346">Austrian positions near Stanislau are captured by the Russians, with many prisoners; Russian cavalry pursue the retreating enemy.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-07-09" id="N78349">July 9 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N78354">The Russians advance on Halicz.</p>
<p id="N78357">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Vanguard</span></i> (battleship) is destroyed by an internal explosion with heavy loss of life, at Scapa Flow.</p>
<p id="N78363">British naval airmen bomb the War Office at Constantinople and the <i><span class="vessel">Goeben</span></i> and other ships in harbour.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-07-10" id="N78369">July 10 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N78374">A fierce German attack on the British positions near the mouth of the Yser (the Battle of Nieuport): two British battalions are cut off and overwhelmed; the Germans win the right bank of the river at the mouth.</p>
<p id="N78377">The Russians capture Halicz<span class="ref"> (see July 23)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-07-11" id="N78384">July 11 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N78389">The Russians capture Kalusz (17 miles from Stanislau).</p>
<p id="N78392"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—The British defeat a Turkish force on the Euphrates.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-07-12" id="N78398">July 12 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N78403"><span class="theatre">Great Britain</span>:—Resignation of <span class="person">Mr. Austen Chamberlain</span>, Secretary of State for India.</p>
<p id="N78409">The Russians cross the Lomnica (Galicia).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-07-13" id="N78412">July 13 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N78417">The Russians advance south-west of Kalusz (Galicia).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-07-14" id="N78420">July 14 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N78425">The German Imperial Chancellor, <span class="person">von Bethmann-Hollweg</span>, is dismissed by the Kaiser; <span class="person">Herr Michaelis</span> is appointed to succeed him.</p>
<p id="N78428">A fierce German attack on the Chemin-des-Dames meets with partial success; on the Moronvilliers Ridge (east of Rheims) the French capture an important enemy position.</p>
<p id="N78431"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—The British raid the Turkish lines before Gaza.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-07-16" id="N78437">July 16 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N78442">Disorders arise in Petrograd, and among Russian regiments, owing to Bolshevist intrigues.</p>
<p id="N78445">The Russians fall back across the Lomnica (Galicia).</p>
<p id="N78448">British light naval forces intercept and capture four German steamers off the Dutch coast.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-07-17" id="N78451">July 17 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N78456"><span class="theatre">Great Britain</span>:—The name of the Royal Family is altered to 'Windsor' by Royal Proclamation.</p>
<p id="N78462"><span class="theatre">Ministerial changes</span>:—<span class="person">Sir E. Carson</span> enters the War Cabinet<span class="ref"> (see Jan. 21, 1918)</span>; <span class="person">Sir Eric Geddes</span> becomes First Lord of the Admiralty; <span class="person">Mr. Churchill</span> becomes Minister of Munitions; <span class="person">Mr. Montagu</span> succeeds <span class="person">Mr. Austen Chamberlain</span> as Secretary of State for India<span class="ref"> (see Dec. 10, 1916)</span>.</p>
<p id="N78472">Mutineers from Kronstadt arrive in Petrograd.</p>
<p id="N78475"><span class="theatre">Verdun</span>:—The French win back on Hill 304 all ground lost since June 29 and capture 425 prisoners.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-07-18" id="N78481">July 18 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N78486">The disorders in Petrograd are quelled by troops loyal to the Provisional Government.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-07-19" id="N78489">July 19 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N78494"><span class="person">Herr Michaelis</span>, the new German Chancellor, declares in the Reichstag for 'a victor's peace.'</p>
<p id="N78497">The Germans attack in north-eastern Galicia and pierce the Russian Front; here and elsewhere mutinous Russian units refuse to fight.</p>
<p id="N78500"><span class="theatre">East Africa</span>:—The main German forces are defeated at Norongombe and driven in retreat to the Mbemkuru Valley.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-07-20" id="N78506">July 20 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N78511"><span class="theatre">Galicia</span>:—The Germans advance rapidly towards Tarnopol.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-07-21" id="N78517">July 21 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N78522"><span class="theatre">Galicia</span>:—The Russian retreat develops into a rout.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-07-22" id="N78528">July 22 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N78533">Siam declares war on Germany and Austria.</p>
<p id="N78536">Resignation of the Russian Premier, <span class="person">Prince Lvoff</span>; he is succeeded by <span class="person">M. Kerenski</span>.</p>
<p id="N78539">The French repulse German attacks on the Chemin-des-Dames but lose ground at some points.</p>
<p id="N78542">Loyal Russian units make a temporary stand near Krevo, east of Vilna.</p>
<p id="N78545">A German aeroplane raid on Harwich and Felixstowe (11 killed).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-07-23" id="N78548">July 23 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N78553">The Germans occupy Halicz and cross the Sereth south of Tarnopol; the Russians also retreat near Dvinsk and Smorgon; there are wholesale desertions in the Russian Army.</p>
<p id="N78556">In Moldavia the Russians and Roumanians attack in the Susitza and Putna Valleys and capture guns and prisoners.</p>
<p id="N78559">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Otway</span></i> (armed merchant cruiser) is sunk by a submarine in the North Atlantic.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-07-24" id="N78565">July 24 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N78570">The Austro-Germans recapture Stanislau and Tarnopol.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-07-25" id="N78573">July 25 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N78578">The Irish Convention meets in Dublin; <span class="person">Sir Horace Plunkett</span> is appointed Chairman.</p>
<p id="N78581">The Russian retreat in Galicia continues.</p>
<p id="N78584">The Russians and Roumanians gain ground in Moldavia.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-07-26" id="N78587">July 26 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N78592">The Austro-Germans are across the Sereth from Tarnopol to Czortkow; they occupy Kolomea, south of the Dniester.</p>
<p id="N78595">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Ariadne</span></i> (mine layer) is sunk by a submarine in the English Channel (38 lives lost).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-07-28" id="N78601">July 28 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N78606">The Austro-Germans enter south-western Russia on either side of the frontier town of Husiatyn.</p>
<p id="N78609">The Roumanians still advance in Moldavia.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-07-29" id="N78612">July 29 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N78617">An increasing artillery bombardment by the British in Flanders.</p>
<p id="N78620">The Russian retreat continues.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-07-30" id="N78623">July 30 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N78628">The French attack and gain ground south of La Royère, on the Aisne Front.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-07-31" id="N78631">July 31 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N78636">Great Anglo-French attack in front of Ypres (the Third Battle of Ypres; see Nov. 6): St. Julien, Pilkem, Frezenberg, and other villages are captured by the British; the French force the passage of the Yser Canal and carry Steenstrasse and Bixschoote.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-08-01" id="N78639">Aug. 1 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N78644">The Germans counter-attack and recapture St. Julien<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 3)</span>.</p>
<p id="N78651">The Russian generals Brussiloff and Dmitrieff resign; <span class="person">General Korniloff</span> is appointed Russian Commander-in-Chief.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-08-02" id="N78654">Aug. 2 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N78659">The Germans carry British positions on Infantry Hill, east of Monchy.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-08-03" id="N78662">Aug. 3 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N78667">The British recapture St. Julien (Ypres Front) and the positions lost on Infantry Hill (east of Monchy).</p>
<p id="N78670">The Austro-Germans recapture Czernowitz.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-08-06" id="N78673">Aug. 6 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N78678"><span class="theatre">Moldavia</span>:—Roumanian positions are stormed north of Focsani by <span class="person">Mackensen</span>'s forces.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-08-07" id="N78684">Aug. 7 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N78689"><span class="theatre">Moldavia</span>:—<span class="person">Mackensen</span> advances north of Focsani, and captures 3000 prisoners.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-08-08" id="N78695">Aug. 8 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N78700"><span class="theatre">Moldavia</span>:—Retirement of the Russians and Roumanians in the Trotus Valley.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-08-09" id="N78706">Aug. 9 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N78711"><span class="theatre">Moldavia</span>:—<span class="person">Mackensen</span> continues to advance north of Focsani, and crosses the Susitza River on a wide front.</p>
<p id="N78717">The British destroyer <i><span class="vessel">Recruit</span></i> is sunk by a mine in the North Sea.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-08-10" id="N78723">Aug. 10 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N78728">The British advance east of Ypres and enter Glencorse Wood; the French cross the Steenbeek.</p>
<p id="N78731">A German air-raid on Nancy. A French air-raid on Frankfurt-on-Main.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-08-11" id="N78734">Aug. 11 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N78739"><span class="person">Mackensen</span> advances in Moldavia and captures many prisoners.</p>
<p id="N78742">The British liner <i><span class="vessel">City of Athens</span></i> is sunk by a mine near Cape Town.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-08-12" id="N78748">Aug. 12 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N78753">A German aeroplane raid on Southend and Margate (32 killed).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-08-13" id="N78756">Aug. 13 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N78761">The refusal of passports for the Stockholm Conference is announced by the British Government, as a measure agreed between the Allies<span class="ref"> (see May 9 and June 1)</span>.</p>
<p id="N78768">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Bergamot</span></i> (sloop—employed as Special Service ship) is sunk by a submarine in the Atlantic.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-08-14" id="N78774">Aug. 14 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N78779">China declares war on Germany and Austria.</p>
<p id="N78782">Peace proposals by the Pope are delivered to the belligerent Governments.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-08-15" id="N78785">Aug. 15 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N78790">The British attack from north of Loos to north of Lens: Hill 70 and several villages are captured and the defences of Cité St. Auguste penetrated in the northern sector; German positions are carried near Lens.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-08-16" id="N78793">Aug. 16 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N78798">The British attack east and north of Ypres, and capture Langemarck.</p>
<p id="N78801">The French advance near Craonne.</p>
<p id="N78804">The Germans are checked by the Roumanians in Moldavia.</p>
<p id="N78807">An action between British and German destroyers in the Bight of Heligoland.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-08-17" id="N78810">Aug. 17 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N78815">The French gain ground east of Bixschoote.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-08-18" id="N78818">Aug. 18 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N78823">German counter-attacks near Lens are repulsed with heavy loss.</p>
<p id="N78826"><span class="theatre">The Isonzo Front</span>:—The Italians bombard the Austrian positions from Monte Nero to the sea.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-08-19" id="N78832">Aug. 19 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N78837"><span class="theatre">The Isonzo Front</span>:—The Italians attack on a thirty-mile front, and capture the Austrian first line from Plava to the sea.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-08-20" id="N78843">Aug. 20 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N78848">The French attack at Verdun on a front of 11 miles; they capture Avocourt, the Cumières Woods, and other strong positions, with 4000 prisoners.</p>
<p id="N78851">The Germans advance on the Riga Front with little opposition.</p>
<p id="N78854"><span class="theatre">The Isonzo Front</span>:—The Italians make rapid progress.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-08-21" id="N78860">Aug. 21 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N78865">The British gain ground north of Lens.</p>
<p id="N78868">The French make further progress near Verdun.</p>
<p id="N78871">A Zeppelin raid on the Yorkshire coast. A Zeppelin is brought down off Jutland by British light naval forces.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-08-22" id="N78874">Aug. 22 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N78879">Lens is invested by the British on three sides.</p>
<p id="N78882"><span class="theatre">The Isonzo Front</span>:—The Italians continue to advance, 16,000 prisoners being claimed to date.</p>
<p id="N78888">A German aeroplane raid on Ramsgate, Margate, and Dover; three raiders are brought down.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-08-23" id="N78891">Aug. 23 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N78896"><span class="theatre">The Isonzo Front</span>:—The Italians make further progress; they claim over 20,000 prisoners since the beginning of the offensive.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-08-24" id="N78902">Aug. 24 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N78907">The British are driven back near the Ypres-Menin road.</p>
<p id="N78910"><span class="theatre">Verdun Front</span>:—The French capture Hill 304 and reach the southern bank of the Forges brook.</p>
<p id="N78916"><span class="theatre">The Isonzo Front</span>:—The Italians capture Monte Santo, north of Gorizia.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-08-28" id="N78922">Aug. 28 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N78927"><span class="theatre">Moldavia</span>:—A Russian division mutinies and leaves the field.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-08-31" id="N78933">Aug. 31 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N78938">The French gain ground on the Chemin-des-Dames.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-09-01" id="N78941">Sept. 1 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N78946">The Germans cross the Dvina at Uexküll, which constitutes a threat to the Riga-Petrograd Railway.</p>
<p id="N78949">British light naval forces sink four German mine-sweepers off the coast of Jutland.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-09-02" id="N78952">Sept. 2 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N78957"><span class="theatre">East Africa</span>:—A German detachment surrenders at Kakera.</p>
<p id="N78963">A German aeroplane raid on Dover.</p>
<p id="N78966">A British naval air-raid on Adrianople.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-09-03" id="N78969">Sept. 3 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N78974">Riga falls to the Germans, who occupy the town unopposed and advance in pursuit of the retreating and disorganised Russians.</p>
<p id="N78977">A German aeroplane raid on the south-east of England.</p>
<p id="N78980">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Dundee</span></i> (armed boarding-steamer) is sunk by a submarine in the entrance of the English Channel.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-09-04" id="N78986">Sept. 4 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N78991">The Germans cross the Aa, 33 miles north-east of Riga.</p>
<p id="N78994"><span class="theatre">The Isonzo Front</span>:—The Italians capture enemy positions on Monte St. Gabriele.</p>
<p id="N79000">A German submarine shells Scarborough (3 killed).</p>
<p id="N79003">A night raid by German aeroplanes on London (11 killed).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-09-05" id="N79006">Sept. 5 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N79011">The Russians lose the line of the Dvina as far as Friedrichstadt.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-09-07" id="N79014">Sept. 7 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N79019">Resignation of <span class="person">M. Ribot</span>, the French Premier<span class="ref"> (see March 19)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-09-08" id="N79026">Sept. 8 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N79031"><span class="person">M. Kerenski</span> dismisses <span class="person">General Korniloff</span> from the post of Russian Commander-in-Chief; <span class="person">General Korniloff</span> marches on Petrograd.</p>
<p id="N79034">The United States Government discloses the 'sink without trace' incident in Germany's dealings in the Argentine through Sweden.</p>
<p id="N79037"><span class="theatre">Verdun Front</span>:—The French capture Chaume Wood.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-09-11" id="N79043">Sept. 11 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N79048"><span class="theatre">Russia</span>:—<span class="person">M. Kerenski</span> assumes the position of Commander-in-Chief.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-09-12" id="N79054">Sept. 12 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N79059"><span class="person">M. Painlevé</span> succeeds <span class="person">M. Ribot</span> as French Premier<span class="ref"> (see Nov. 13)</span>.</p>
<p id="N79066">The Argentine Government hands <span class="person">Count Luxburg</span>, the German agent in Buenos Ayres, his passports.</p>
<p id="N79069">A British naval air-raid on Zeebrugge.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-09-13" id="N79072">Sept. 13 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N79077"><span class="theatre">Russia</span>:—<span class="person">General Korniloff</span>'s revolt fails.</p>
<p id="N79083">The Allies advance in Southern Albania.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-09-14" id="N79086">Sept. 14 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N79091"><span class="theatre">Russia</span>:—<span class="person">General Korniloff</span> surrenders to <span class="person">General Alexeieff</span> and the Provisional Government.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-09-15" id="N79097">Sept. 15 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N79102"><span class="theatre">Russia</span>:—The Provisional Government proclaims a Republic; a new War Cabinet is appointed under <span class="person">M. Kerenski</span>, who is virtually Dictator.</p>
<p id="N79108">A British naval air-raid on enemy shipping between Ostend and Blankenberghe.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-09-16" id="N79111">Sept. 16 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N79116">Allied air-raids on Stuttgart and Colmar.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-09-18" id="N79119">Sept. 18 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N79124">The British destroyer <i><span class="vessel">Contest</span></i> is sunk by a submarine in the English Channel.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-09-20" id="N79130">Sept. 20 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N79135">The British attack on an eight-mile front east of Ypres: Inverness Copse, Glencorse Wood, and other important positions are captured, with 2000 prisoners.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-09-21" id="N79138">Sept. 21 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N79143">East of Ypres the British repulse counter-attacks and make further progress.</p>
<p id="N79146">The Russians evacuate the important bridge-head of Jacobstadt (on the Dvina, 70 miles south-east of Riga).</p>
<p id="N79149"><span class="theatre">East Africa</span>:—The British advancing from the direction of the port of Kilwa break up an enemy force and drive it in flight towards the Mbemkuru River.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-09-22" id="N79155">Sept. 22 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N79160">The Germans occupy Jacobstadt (south-east of Riga).</p>
<p id="N79163">Ostend is shelled by British ships of the Belgian coast patrol.</p>
<p id="N79166">French air-raids on Stuttgart, Trèves, Coblenz, and Frankfurt.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-09-24" id="N79169">Sept. 24 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N79174">A night raid on London by German aeroplanes (15 killed).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-09-25" id="N79177">Sept. 25 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N79182">A British naval force bombards Ostend.</p>
<p id="N79185">A night raid on London by German aeroplanes (7 killed); one raider is destroyed.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-09-26" id="N79188">Sept. 26 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N79193">The British attack on a six-mile front east of Ypres; Polygon Wood and Zonnebeke are captured.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-09-27" id="N79196">Sept. 27 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N79201">A raid by British naval airmen on the German aerodrome at St. Denis Westrem (near Ghent).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-09-28" id="N79204">Sept. 28 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N79209"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—The Turks are crushingly defeated by <span class="person">General Maude</span> at Ramadieh on the Euphrates (the Battle of Ramadieh).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-09-29" id="N79215">Sept. 29 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N79220"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—The British victory at Ramadieh ends in the surrender of the Turkish force; over 3000 unwounded prisoners are captured.</p>
<p id="N79226">A night raid on London by German aeroplanes (11 killed).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-09-30" id="N79229">Sept. 30 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N79234">A night raid on London by German aeroplanes.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-10-01" id="N79237">Oct. 1 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N79242">East of Ypres strong German counter-attacks are repulsed by the British.</p>
<p id="N79245"><span class="theatre">East Africa</span>:—An enemy detachment of 200 surrenders to the British north of the Central Railway.</p>
<p id="N79251">A night raid on London by German aeroplanes (10 killed).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-10-02" id="N79254">Oct. 2 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N79259">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Drake</span></i> (cruiser) is torpedoed off the north coast of Ireland; she makes harbour and sinks in shallow water (19 lives lost).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-10-04" id="N79265">Oct. 4 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N79270">The British attack Passchendaele Ridge; positions of great importance and 4500 prisoners are captured.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-10-05" id="N79273">Oct. 5 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N79278">An explosion occurs in a munitions factory at Chilwell, with heavy loss of life.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-10-06" id="N79281">Oct. 6 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N79286">Peru and Uruguay break off diplomatic relations with Germany.</p>
<p id="N79289">German counter-attacks at Passchendaele are repulsed with heavy loss.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-10-09" id="N79292">Oct. 9 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N79297">Death of <span class="person">Hussein Kamel</span>, Sultan of Egypt since 1914<span class="ref"> (see Dec. 18, 1914)</span>.</p>
<p id="N79304">The British and French attack between Passchendaele Ridge and Houthulst Forest; the villages of St. Jean, Mangelaere, Veldhoek, and Koekuit are taken, and the capture of Poelcappelle is completed.</p>
<p id="N79307"><span class="theatre">East Africa</span>:—A Belgian column occupies Mahenge.</p>
<p id="N79313">A serious mutiny which occurred in the German Navy in August is announced in the German Reichstag.</p>
<p id="N79316">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Champagne</span></i> (armed merchant-cruiser) is sunk by a submarine in the Atlantic (56 lives lost).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-10-11" id="N79322">Oct. 11 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N79327">The British Government stops commercial cable communication with Holland until the transit of sand and scrap-iron by Dutch waterways from Germany into Belgium shall be discontinued.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-10-12" id="N79330">Oct. 12 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N79335">The British again attack between Passchendaele and Houthulst Forest; their progress is checked by the mud.</p>
<p id="N79338">The Germans attack the island of Oesel in the Gulf of Riga with naval and military forces; the greater part of the island is occupied.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-10-13" id="N79341">Oct. 13 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N79346">The Germans capture Arensburg, the capital of Oesel Island.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-10-14" id="N79349">Oct. 14 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N79354"><span class="theatre">The Gulf of Riga</span>:—An indeterminate action between German and Russian naval forces is fought in the Sound between Oesel Island and Dago Island.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-10-16" id="N79360">Oct. 16 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N79365">It is announced in Parliament that a British Air Ministry will be constituted.</p>
<p id="N79368">The Germans complete the occupation of Oesel, taking many prisoners.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-10-17" id="N79371">Oct. 17 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N79376"><span class="theatre">Gulf of Riga</span>:—The Germans force Irben Strait; the Russians are compelled to sink and abandon their battleship <i><span class="vessel">Slava</span></i> in Moon Sound.</p>
<p id="N79385">Scandinavian merchantmen, convoyed by two British destroyers, are attacked by a German naval force in the North Sea: the two destroyers, the <i><span class="vessel">Mary Rose</span></i> and the <i><span class="vessel">Strongbow</span></i>, are sunk after a gallant fight (135 lives lost); most of the merchantmen are sunk, but three escape.</p>
<p id="N79394">The U.S.A. transport <i><span class="vessel">Antilles</span></i> is sunk by a submarine (67 lives lost).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-10-18" id="N79400">Oct. 18 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N79405"><span class="theatre">The Gulf of Riga</span>:—The Germans complete the capture of Moon Island.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-10-19" id="N79411">Oct. 19 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N79416"><span class="theatre">The Gulf of Riga</span>:—The Germans complete the capture of Dago Island.</p>
<p id="N79422">A Zeppelin raid on the east and north-east of England and on London (27 killed); five of the raiders are brought down in France on their return journey.</p>
<p id="N79425">H.M. armed merchant-cruiser <i><span class="vessel">Orama</span></i> is sunk by a submarine in the Atlantic.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-10-20" id="N79431">Oct. 20 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N79436"><span class="theatre">The Gulf of Riga</span>:—The Germans capture Schilden Island.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-10-21" id="N79442">Oct. 21 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N79447"><span class="theatre">The Gulf of Riga</span>:—The Germans land at Verder, on the mainland of Esthonia<span class="ref"> (see Oct. 27)</span>.</p>
<p id="N79457">British naval forces bombard Ostend.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-10-22" id="N79460">Oct. 22 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N79465">The Germans counter-attack and gain ground in Houthulst Forest.</p>
<p id="N79468">A German withdrawal south of Riga.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-10-23" id="N79471">Oct. 23 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N79476">The French attack on the Aisne Front: the German defences are deeply penetrated; Malmaison Fort and other important positions are carried, 8000 prisoners being captured.</p>
<p id="N79479">The Italian Isonzo and north-eastern fronts are heavily bombarded at many points by the Austro-Germans, the Austrians in this area having been strongly reinforced by Germans.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-10-24" id="N79482">Oct. 24 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N79487">The Battle of Caporetto begins<span class="ref"> (see Nov. 18)</span>: the Italians are strongly attacked in the neighbourhood of Tolmino, on the Upper Isonzo, by Austro-German forces; the Italian Second Army gives way on a twenty-mile front.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-10-25" id="N79490">Oct. 25 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N79495">Resignation of <span class="person">Signor Boselli</span> and the Italian Cabinet.</p>
<p id="N79498">A further French advance on the Aisne Front: many guns are captured.</p>
<p id="N79501">The Italians retreat rapidly on the whole front between Plezzo and a point south of Auzza: the Austro-Germans capture Monte Matajur (south-west of Caporetto); they claim 30,000 prisoners in two days' fighting.</p>
<p id="N79504">A British air-raid on the railways and factories at Saarbrücken.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-10-26" id="N79507">Oct. 26 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N79512">The British advance on the Passchendaele Ridge; the French capture the village of Dvaeibank.</p>
<p id="N79515">The Italians continue to retreat; their line is pierced on the Julian Front; 60,000 prisoners and 500 guns are claimed by the enemy to date.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-10-27" id="N79518">Oct. 27 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N79523">The French and Belgians advance on either side of the Ypres-Dixmude road: Merckem is captured.</p>
<p id="N79526">American troops are in action in France for the first time<span class="ref"> (see June 26)</span>.</p>
<p id="N79533"><span class="theatre">The Gulf of Riga</span>:—The Germans evacuate the mainland of Esthonia<span class="ref"> (see Oct. 21)</span>.</p>
<p id="N79543"><span class="theatre">Italy</span>:—The Germans capture Cividale and sweep into the Friulian plain; 80,000 prisoners are claimed to date.</p>
<p id="N79549">An action between Allied and German destroyers off the Belgian coast.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-10-28" id="N79552">Oct. 28 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N79557">A new Italian Cabinet is formed under <span class="person">Signor Orlando</span>.</p>
<p id="N79560">Fall of Gorizia: the Italians retreat towards the line of the Tagliamento; 100,000 prisoners and 700 guns are claimed by the enemy to date<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 8, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-10-29" id="N79567">Oct. 29 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N79572"><span class="theatre">Italy</span>:—The Austro-Germans occupy Udine.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-10-30" id="N79578">Oct. 30 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N79583">Resignation of <span class="person">Herr Michaelis</span>, the German Imperial Chancellor<span class="ref"> (see July 14)</span>.</p>
<p id="N79590">The British advance on the Passchendaele Ridge and reach the outskirts of Passchendaele.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-10-31" id="N79593">Oct. 31 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N79598">The remains of the Italian Second and Third Armies are withdrawn behind the Tagliamento River; 120,000 prisoners and over 1000 guns are claimed by the enemy to date.</p>
<p id="N79601"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—The British, under <span class="person">General Allenby</span>, resume the offensive on the Gaza Front; Beersheba is captured; 1800 prisoners and 15 guns are taken.</p>
<p id="N79607">A night raid on London by German aeroplanes (8 killed).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-11-01" id="N79610">Nov. 1 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N79615"><span class="person">Count Hertling</span> succeeds <span class="person">Herr Michaelis</span> as German Imperial Chancellor<span class="ref"> (see Oct 1, 1918)</span>.</p>
<p id="N79622"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—<span class="person">General Allenby</span> captures an important section of the defences of Gaza and advances north of Beersheba.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-11-02" id="N79628">Nov. 2 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N79633">The Germans abandon the whole line of the Chemin-des-Dames; they retire from its northern slopes across the Ailette.</p>
<p id="N79636"><span class="theatre">Italy</span>:—The Austro-Germans reach the east bank of the Tagliamento.</p>
<p id="N79642">A British naval force sinks a German auxiliary cruiser and ten German patrol craft in the Kattegat.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-11-03" id="N79645">Nov. 3 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N79650">The French reach the Ailette on the whole front between Corbeny and the Oise-Aisne Canal.</p>
<p id="N79653">French troops arrive in Italy.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-11-04" id="N79656">Nov. 4 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N79661">British troops arrive in Italy.</p>
<p id="N79664">The Austro-Germans force the passage of the Tagliamento north of Pinzano.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-11-05" id="N79667">Nov. 5 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N79672">The Italians retreat from the Tagliamento towards the Piave.</p>
<p id="N79675"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—<span class="person">General Maude</span> defeats the Turks before Tekrit (100 miles beyond Baghdad).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-11-06" id="N79681">Nov. 6 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N79686">The British capture Passchendaele (this ends the Third Battle of Ypres: see July 31).</p>
<p id="N79689"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—The British capture important positions eleven miles north of Beersheba.</p>
<p id="N79695"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—The British capture Tekrit.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-11-07" id="N79701">Nov. 7 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N79706">A <i lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">coup d'état</i> in Petrograd by the Bolshevists under <span class="person">Lenin</span>: <span class="person">Kerenski</span> and the Provisional Government are overthrown; <span class="person">Lenin</span> and <span class="person">Trotsky</span> become masters of the situation.</p>
<p id="N79714">The Italians reach the Livenza, the passage of which is forced by the Austro-Germans; 250,000 prisoners and 2300 guns are claimed by the enemy to date.</p>
<p id="N79717"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—<span class="person">General Allenby</span> captures Gaza.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-11-09" id="N79723">Nov. 9 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N79728">It is announced that the Allied War Conference at Rapallo has decided to create a Supreme Council to ensure unity of command.</p>
<p id="N79731"><span class="person">General Diaz</span> succeeds <span class="person">General Cadorna</span> as Italian Generalissimo.</p>
<p id="N79734">The Austro-Germans advance in the Trentino and capture Asiago.</p>
<p id="N79737"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—The Turks retreat on Hebron and Jerusalem with heavy loss in guns, prisoners, and other casualties.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-11-10" id="N79743">Nov. 10 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N79748">The arrests of <span class="person">M. Kerenski</span> and <span class="person">General Korniloff</span> are ordered by the Petrograd Soviet; troops loyal to <span class="person">M. Kerenski</span> occupy Tsarskoe Selo.</p>
<p id="N79751"><span class="theatre">Italy</span>:—The Austro-Germans attack on the Upper Piave and capture Belluno.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-11-11" id="N79757">Nov. 11 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N79762"><span class="theatre">Italy</span>:—Austro-German attacks in the Trentino (designed to turn the line of the Piave) are defeated.</p>
<p id="N79768">The British monitor <span class="notation">M15</span> and the destroyer <i><span class="vessel">Staunch</span></i> are sunk by submarine off the coast of Palestine.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-11-12" id="N79774">Nov. 12 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N79779"><span class="person">Mr. Lloyd George</span> makes his 'Paris speech' declaring for an Allied War Council to ensure unity of command.</p>
<p id="N79782">The Italians evacuate Fonzano and a part of the Val Sugano.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-11-13" id="N79785">Nov. 13 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N79790"><span class="person">M. Kerenski</span>'s forces are defeated by the Bolshevists at Tsarskoe Selo; flight of <span class="person">M. Kerenski</span>.</p>
<p id="N79793"><span class="person">M. Painlevé</span>'s Government is defeated in the French Chamber<span class="ref"> (see Sept. 12)</span>.</p>
<p id="N79800"><span class="theatre">Italy</span>:—The Austro-Germans force the passage of the Lower Piave at Zenson.</p>
<p id="N79806"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—<span class="person">General Allenby</span> drives the Turks from strong positions north of Ascalon; the junction of the Beersheba-Damascus railway with the line from Jerusalem is occupied by the British.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-11-14" id="N79812">Nov. 14 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N79817"><span class="person">Mr. Lloyd George</span> announces to the House of Commons the terms of agreement between the Western Allies for a Supreme War Council.</p>
<p id="N79820"><span class="theatre">Italy</span>:—Austro-German attacks on a twenty-mile front, designed to turn the line of the Piave from the north, are repulsed.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-11-15" id="N79826">Nov. 15 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N79831">The Italians retreat in the Val Sugano and the Austro-Germans occupy Cismon.</p>
<p id="N79834"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—The British approach Jaffa (Joppa).</p>
<p id="N79840"><span class="theatre">East Africa</span>:—British troops occupy Chivata.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-11-16" id="N79846">Nov. 16 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N79851">A new French Ministry is formed with <span class="person">M. Clemenceau</span> as Premier and War Minister.</p>
<p id="N79854">The Austro-Germans attack the line of the Piave on a twenty-mile front; they capture Monte Prasolan, the Italians retiring on Monte Grappa; the enemy cross the Lower Piave at two more points but are checked on the western bank.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-11-17" id="N79857">Nov. 17 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N79862"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—The British enter Jaffa (Joppa).</p>
<p id="N79868">A cruiser action in the Heligoland Bight: the German naval forces retire damaged to the protection of Heligoland.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-11-18" id="N79871">Nov. 18 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N79876"><span class="theatre">Italy</span>:—The end of the Battle of Caporetto<span class="ref"> (see Oct. 24)</span>.</p>
<p id="N79886"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—The British approach Jerusalem.</p>
<p id="N79892">Death of <span class="person">General Sir Stanley Maude</span> in Mesopotamia<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 28, 1916)</span>.</p>
<p id="N79899">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Candytuft</span></i> (sloop—employed as Special Service ship) is sunk by a submarine in the Mediterranean.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-11-19" id="N79905">Nov. 19 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N79910">In the British House of Commons <span class="person">Mr. Lloyd George</span> successfully defends his 'Paris speech' and the policy of a Supreme War Council.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-11-20" id="N79913">Nov. 20 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N79918">A conference opens at Downing Street between the British War Cabinet and representatives of the U.S.A.</p>
<p id="N79921">The British Third Army under <span class="person">Sir Julian Byng</span> attacks and carries the Hindenburg line on a ten-mile front before Cambrai (the Battle of Cambrai; see Dec. 7): the advance through the German wire is led by tanks; Bonavis, La Vacquerie, Havrincourt, and other places are captured; the advance is continued to within five miles of Cambrai.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-11-21" id="N79924">Nov. 21 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N79929"><span class="theatre">Russia</span>:—The Lenin-Trotsky Government announces its intention to open negotiations for 'a democratic peace.' <span class="person">Ensign Krilenko</span> is appointed Russian Commander-in-Chief.</p>
<p id="N79935">The British continue to advance before Cambrai: Bourlon Wood is entered; Fontaine Notre Dame (2½ miles from Cambrai) is captured; Mœuvres is reached. The number of prisoners taken to date exceeds 8000.</p>
<p id="N79938"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—<span class="person">General Allenby</span> captures the Nebi Samwil Ridge (Mizpeh), five miles from Jerusalem.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-11-22" id="N79944">Nov. 22 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N79949"><span class="theatre">Cambrai Front</span>:—The Germans recapture Fontaine Notre Dame.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-11-23" id="N79955">Nov. 23 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N79960"><span class="theatre">Cambrai Front</span>:—The British capture Bourlon Wood.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-11-24" id="N79966">Nov. 24 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N79971"><span class="theatre">Cambrai Front</span>:—Fierce fighting in the northern outskirts of Bourlon Wood.</p>
<p id="N79977"><span class="person">General Plumer</span> is appointed to command the British forces in Italy.</p>
<p id="N79980"><span class="person">Lieut.-General Marshall</span> is appointed to command the British forces in Mesopotamia.</p>
<p id="N79983">The German submarine <span class="notation">U48</span> is destroyed by British drifters on the Goodwin Sands.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-11-25" id="N79986">Nov. 25 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N79991">The French advance north of Verdun.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-11-27" id="N79994">Nov. 27 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N79999"><span class="theatre">Cambrai Front</span>:—The British gain ground towards Fontaine Notre Dame and the village of Bourlon.</p>
<p id="N80005"><span class="theatre">East Africa</span>:—Near Nevale 3500 German and native troops, under <span class="person">Colonel Tafel</span>, surrender to the British.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-11-28" id="N80011">Nov. 28 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N80016">The British Admiralty announces the formation of the Women's Royal Naval Service.</p>
<p id="N80019">The Elder-Dempster liner <i><span class="vessel">Apapa</span></i> is sunk by a submarine (79 lives lost).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-11-29" id="N80025">Nov. 29 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N80030">Meetings of the Allied Conference open at Paris.</p>
<p id="N80033"><span class="person">Count Hertling</span> announces that Germany will treat with the Bolshevists.</p>
<p id="N80036"><span class="person">Lord Lansdowne</span>'s letter advising a revision of war aims is published in the <cite>Daily Telegraph</cite>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-11-30" id="N80042">Nov. 30 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N80047">The Germans counter-attack in strength before Cambrai: they capture Lateau Wood and penetrate the British positions as far as La Vacquerie, Gonnelieu, and Gouzeaucourt; La Vacquerie is recovered by a British counter-attack; the Germans claim 4000 prisoners and 60 guns.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-12-01" id="N80050">Dec. 1 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N80055"><span class="theatre">Cambrai Front</span>:—The British recapture Gonnelieu.</p>
<p id="N80061"><span class="theatre">East Africa</span>:—The British drive the last enemy forces into Portuguese territory.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-12-02" id="N80067">Dec. 2 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N80072">German and Bolshevist plenipotentiaries meet at Brest-Litovsk to negotiate an armistice.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-12-03" id="N80075">Dec. 3 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N80080">The Russian General Staff surrenders to Bolshevist troops; <span class="person">General Dukhonin</span>, the former Commander-in-Chief, is murdered.</p>
<p id="N80083"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—The Turks are driven out of the hills north of Deli Abbas; they retreat towards the Jebel Hamrin range.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-12-04" id="N80089">Dec. 4 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N80094"><span class="theatre">Italy</span>:—The Austro-Germans attack in the Asiago region and win Italian hill positions.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-12-05" id="N80100">Dec. 5 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N80105"><span class="theatre">Cambrai Front</span>:—The British evacuate Bourlon Wood.</p>
<p id="N80111"><span class="theatre">Italy</span>:—The Austro-Germans make progress on the Asiago Front: Monte Zomo and Monte Castelgomberto are carried.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-12-06" id="N80117">Dec. 6 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N80122">An insurrection breaks out in Lisbon against the Government in power<span class="ref"> (see Dec. 11)</span>.</p>
<p id="N80129">Roumania agrees to an armistice.</p>
<p id="N80132"><span class="theatre">Cambrai Front</span>:—Strong enemy attacks south of Bourlon Wood are repulsed by the British.</p>
<p id="N80138"><span class="theatre">Italy</span>:—The Austro-Germans capture Monte Sisemol.</p>
<p id="N80144"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—The British occupy Hebron.</p>
<p id="N80150">A German aeroplane raid on London in the early morning (7 killed); two raiders are destroyed.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-12-07" id="N80153">Dec. 7 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N80158">The United States Government declares war on Austria.</p>
<p id="N80161">The end of the Battle of Cambrai<span class="ref"> (see Nov. 20)</span>, the British gains having been largely abandoned.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-12-08" id="N80168">Dec. 8 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N80173">Ecuador breaks off diplomatic relations with Germany.</p>
<p id="N80176">The Russian peoples on the Don and in the Urals revolt against the Bolshevists.</p>
<p id="N80179"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—The British advance isolates Jerusalem.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-12-09" id="N80185">Dec. 9 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N80190"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—Fall of Jerusalem to <span class="person">General Allenby</span><span class="ref"> (see Dec. 11)</span>.</p>
<p id="N80200">The Italians torpedo two Austrian battleships in the port of Trieste, sinking one of them (the <i><span class="vessel">Wien</span></i>).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-12-10" id="N80206">Dec. 10 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N80211">Panama declares war on Austria.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-12-11" id="N80214">Dec. 11 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N80219">The Russian Constituent Assembly meets in Petrograd.</p>
<p id="N80222">The Revolutionary party establishes itself in Lisbon, and forms a Government which declares its solidarity with the Allies<span class="ref"> (see Dec. 6)</span>.</p>
<p id="N80229"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—<span class="person">General Allenby</span> formally enters Jerusalem accompanied by the military attachés of France, Italy, and the United States.</p>
<p id="N80235">A German submarine bombards Funchal, Madeira.</p>
<p id="N80238">A British air-raid on Germany between Metz and the Rhine.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-12-12" id="N80241">Dec. 12 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N80246">The Germans attack, and gain some ground near Bullecourt.</p>
<p id="N80249"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—<span class="person">General Allenby</span> advances north and north-west of Jerusalem.</p>
<p id="N80255">A raid by German destroyers in the North Sea: they attack six merchantmen (five Neutral and one British) escorted by two British destroyers (the <i><span class="vessel">Partridge</span></i> and the <i><span class="vessel">Pellew</span></i>) and four armed trawlers; the merchantmen and the escort are all sunk with the exception of the destroyer <i><span class="vessel">Pellew</span></i>, which is disabled.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-12-13" id="N80267">Dec. 13 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N80272">The Russian Constituent Assembly is forcibly dispersed by the Bolshevists.</p>
<p id="N80275">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Stephen Furness</span></i> (armed boarding-steamer) is sunk by a submarine in the Irish Sea.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-12-14" id="N80281">Dec. 14 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N80286">The French cruiser <i><span class="vessel">Châteaurenault</span></i> is sunk by a submarine (10 lives lost).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-12-15" id="N80292">Dec. 15 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N80297">An armistice for one month from Dec. 17 is signed at Brest-Litovsk by representatives of the German Government and of the Russian Bolshevist Government.</p>
<p id="N80300"><span class="person">General Guillaumet</span> succeeds <span class="person">General Sarrail</span> in command of the Allied forces at Salonika.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-12-16" id="N80303">Dec. 16 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N80308">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Arbutus</span></i> (sloop—employed as Special Service ship) is sunk by a submarine off the Bristol Channel.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-12-18" id="N80314">Dec. 18 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N80319"><span class="theatre">Italy</span>:—The Austro-Germans attack from Col Caprile to Monte Pertica; they capture Monte Asolone with 2000 prisoners.</p>
<p id="N80325">An evening raid by German aeroplanes on Essex, Kent, and London (10 killed); one raider is brought down.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-12-19" id="N80328">Dec. 19 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N80333">The Ukraine Government demands recognition by the Bolshevist Government.</p>
<p id="N80336">The Italians recapture part of Monte Asolone.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-12-21" id="N80339">Dec. 21 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N80344">The Italians complete the recapture of Monte Asolone.</p>
<p id="N80347"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—<span class="person">General Allenby</span> advances northward.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-12-22" id="N80353">Dec. 22 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N80358">Peace negotiations are opened at Brest-Litovsk between the German Government and the Russian Bolshevist Government; <span class="person">Herr von Kühlmann</span> presides.</p>
<p id="N80361">A German aeroplane raid on the Kentish coast; one machine is forced to land and its crew is captured.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-12-23" id="N80364">Dec. 23 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N80369"><span class="theatre">Italy</span>:—The Austro-Germans capture Val Bella and the Col del Rosso in the Frenzela Valley; they claim 9000 prisoners.</p>
<p id="N80375">Three British destroyers, the <i><span class="vessel">Surprise</span></i>, <i><span class="vessel">Tornado</span></i>, and <i><span class="vessel">Torrent</span></i>, are sunk by mines off the Dutch coast with considerable loss of life.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-12-24" id="N80387">Dec. 24 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N80392">A British air-raid on Mannheim.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-12-26" id="N80395">Dec. 26 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N80400"><span class="person">Vice-Admiral Sir Rosslyn Wemyss</span> succeeds <span class="person">Admiral Sir John Jellicoe</span> as First Sea Lord<span class="ref"> (see Nov. 29, 1916)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-12-27" id="N80407">Dec. 27 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N80412"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—Turkish attacks north of Jerusalem are shattered and a British offensive is launched subsequently against the defeated enemy.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-12-28" id="N80418">Dec. 28 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N80423">The Labour Memorandum on War Aims is adopted at a special British Labour Conference.</p>
<p id="N80426"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—The British advance on a nine-mile front: they capture Ramah and Beitunia.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-12-29" id="N80432">Dec. 29 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N80437"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—The British capture Bireh (on the Shechem road, nine miles north of Jerusalem).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1917-12-30" id="N80443">Dec. 30 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N80448">The Germans attack Welsh Ridge on the Cambrai Front, and gain ground.</p>
<p id="N80451"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—The British continue to advance; they capture Bethel and other villages.</p>
<p id="N80457">The British destroyer <i><span class="vessel">Attack</span></i> is sunk by a mine off Alexandria.</p>
</div>

<hr class="chap"/>
<h2><a name="eighteen" id="eighteen">1918</a></h2>

<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-01-01" id="N80473">Jan. 1 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N80478"><span class="theatre">Italy</span>:—The Austrians are driven from Zenson, west of the Piave.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-01-02" id="N80484">Jan. 2 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N80489">The German peace conditions are denounced by the Bolshevists as a policy of annexation.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-01-04" id="N80492">Jan. 4 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N80497">The British hospital ship <i><span class="vessel">Rewa</span></i> is sunk by a submarine in the Bristol Channel (three lives lost).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-01-05" id="N80503">Jan. 5 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N80508"><span class="person">Mr. Lloyd George</span> makes a declaration of 'War Aims' after consultation with <span class="person">Mr. Asquith</span>, <span class="person">Lord Grey</span>, and the leaders of the Labour Party.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-01-08" id="N80511">Jan. 8 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N80516"><span class="person">President Wilson</span> in an address to Congress lays down the 'fourteen points' on which, in his opinion, peace should be based.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-01-09" id="N80519">Jan. 9 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N80524">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Racoon</span></i> (destroyer) is lost, with all hands, in a storm off the coast of Ireland.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-01-10" id="N80530">Jan. 10 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N80535">In the peace negotiations at Brest-Litovsk the independence of the Ukraine Republic is accepted both by the Central Powers and the Bolshevists.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-01-12" id="N80538">Jan. 12 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N80543"><span class="theatre">Verdun Front</span>:—A German attack at Chaume Wood is repulsed.</p>
<p id="N80549">British forces are disembarked at Port Amelia in Portuguese East Africa.</p>
<p id="N80552">Two British destroyers are wrecked off the coast of Scotland (all lives lost except one).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-01-14" id="N80555">Jan. 14 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N80560">The Italians attack and gain ground east of the Brenta in the Asolone district (491 prisoners).</p>
<p id="N80563">Yarmouth is shelled by German destroyers (four killed).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-01-15" id="N80566">Jan. 15 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N80571">The result of an inquiry into the operations before Cambrai<span class="ref"> (see Nov. 20-Dec. 7, 1917)</span> is announced in the British House of Commons: the Higher Command is exonerated.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-01-18" id="N80578">Jan. 18 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N80583">The Russian Constituent Assembly meets in Petrograd: it refuses to accept the dictation of the Bolshevist Government.</p>
<p id="N80586"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—The British line is advanced north of Jerusalem.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-01-19" id="N80592">Jan. 19 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N80597">The Russian Constituent Assembly is forcibly dissolved by the Bolshevists.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-01-20" id="N80600">Jan. 20 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N80605">The <i><span class="vessel">Goeben</span></i> and the <i><span class="vessel">Breslau</span></i> make a sortie from the Dardanelles and are engaged by British naval forces: the <i><span class="vessel">Breslau</span></i> is sunk by a mine; the <i><span class="vessel">Goeben</span></i> also strikes a mine but escapes into the Straits, where she runs aground at Nagara Point; here she is attacked by British aeroplanes; H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Raglan</span></i> (monitor) and a smaller British monitor (<span class="notation">M28</span>) are also sunk in the engagement.</p>
<p id="N80623">The British armed boarding-steamer <i><span class="vessel">Louvain</span></i> is sunk by a submarine in the Mediterranean (224 lives lost).</p>
<p id="N80629">Two German destroyers are sunk by mines in the North Sea.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-01-21" id="N80632">Jan. 21 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N80637"><span class="person">Sir Edward Carson</span> resigns from the British War Cabinet<span class="ref"> (see July 17, 1917)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-01-22" id="N80644">Jan. 22 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N80649"><span class="person">Dr. von Seidler</span>, the Austrian Premier, tenders his resignation, which is refused<span class="ref"> (see June 24, 1917, and July 23, 1918)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-01-23" id="N80656">Jan. 23 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N80661">Two meatless days a week are enforced in Great Britain by a Public Meals Order.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-01-26" id="N80664">Jan. 26 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N80669">It is announced that the British have taken over an additional sector of the front in France, and that their line now extends southward beyond St. Quentin.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-01-27" id="N80672">Jan. 27 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N80677">The <i><span class="vessel">Goeben</span></i> is refloated and towed to Constantinople.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-01-28" id="N80683">Jan. 28 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N80688">The Italians attack between Asiago and the Brenta Valley: they capture the Col del Rosso and 1500 prisoners.</p>
<p id="N80691">A night raid by German aeroplanes on London (58 killed); one raider is destroyed over Essex.</p>
<p id="N80694">The British submarine E14 is sunk by the Turks off Kum Kale (Dardanelles).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-01-29" id="N80697">Jan. 29 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N80702">The Italians capture Monte di Val Bella.</p>
<p id="N80705">German aeroplanes reach the outskirts of London.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-01-30" id="N80708">Jan. 30 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N80713">An air-raid on Paris (49 killed); one raider is destroyed.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-01-31" id="N80716">Jan. 31 (Thurs.)</p>
<p id="N80721">Austrian counter-attacks on Monte di Val Bella are repulsed by the Italians.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-02-04" id="N80724">Feb. 4 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N80729">The trial of <span class="person">Bolo Pasha</span> begins in Paris<span class="ref"> (see Feb. 14)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-02-05" id="N80736">Feb. 5 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N80741">The Anchor liner <i><span class="vessel">Tuscania</span></i>, transporting American troops, is sunk by a submarine off Ireland (166 lives lost).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-02-08" id="N80747">Feb. 8 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N80752">The Germans attack French positions north of the Chemin-des-Dames and are repulsed.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-02-09" id="N80755">Feb. 9 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N80760">Peace is concluded between the Central Powers and the Ukraine Republic.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-02-10" id="N80763">Feb. 10 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N80768">It is announced by <span class="person">Trotsky</span> that Russia is out of the war ('while desisting from signing a formal treaty of peace the state of war with the enemy Powers is ended')<span class="ref"> (see March 2)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-02-11" id="N80775">Feb. 11 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N80780">A French air-raid on Metz.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-02-13" id="N80783">Feb. 13 (Ash Wednesday).</p>
<p id="N80788">The French, assisted by American troops, capture the German salient between Tahure and the Butte du Mesnil.</p>
<p id="N80791"><span class="theatre">Russia</span>:—<span class="person">General Alexeieff</span>'s forces are defeated by the Bolshevists. <span class="person">General Kaledin</span> commits suicide.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-02-14" id="N80797">Feb. 14 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N80802"><span class="person">Bolo Pasha</span> is condemned to death for high treason<span class="ref"> (see Feb. 4 and April 17)</span>.</p>
<p id="N80809"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—The British advance east of the Jerusalem-Shechem road.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-02-15" id="N80815">Feb. 15 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N80820">German destroyers raid the Straits of Dover and sink a British armed trawler and seven drifters. Dover is shelled by a German submarine (one killed, a child).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-02-16" id="N80823">Feb. 16 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N80828">It is announced that <span class="person">Sir William Robertson</span> has resigned his post as British Chief of Staff and that he is succeeded by <span class="person">Sir Henry Wilson</span>.</p>
<p id="N80831">A night raid by German aeroplanes on London (11 killed).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-02-17" id="N80834">Feb. 17 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N80839">A night raid by German aeroplanes on London (19 killed).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-02-18" id="N80842">Feb. 18 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N80847">The armistice between Germany and Russia terminates; the Germans cross the Dvina and occupy Dvinsk and Lutsk; further south, at the invitation of the Ukraine, they advance towards Kovel.</p>
<p id="N80850">Armenia is evacuated by the Russians.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-02-19" id="N80853">Feb. 19 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N80858">The German armies continue to advance rapidly into Russia; they claim to have captured 2500 prisoners and several hundred guns.</p>
<p id="N80861"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—<span class="person">General Allenby</span> attacks north-east of Jerusalem and advances on a front of 15 miles to a depth of 2 miles towards Jericho.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-02-20" id="N80867">Feb. 20 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N80872">The German advance into Russia, towards Reval, Petrograd, Moscow, and Kieff, continues.</p>
<p id="N80875"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—<span class="person">General Allenby</span> advances to within 4 miles of Jericho.</p>
<p id="N80881"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—<span class="person">General Marshall</span> occupies Khan Abu Rayat on the Euphrates, 14 miles north of Ramadie.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-02-21" id="N80887">Feb. 21 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N80892">The German Government outlines the peace terms which it will grant to Russia.</p>
<p id="N80895"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—<span class="person">General Allenby</span> captures Jericho.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-02-22" id="N80901">Feb. 22 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N80906"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—The Turks retreat north of Jericho.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-02-24" id="N80912">Feb. 24 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N80917">Germany's peace terms are accepted by the Russian Central Executive Committee of Soviets.</p>
<p id="N80920"><span class="theatre">Caucasus</span>:—Trebizond is reoccupied by the Turks<span class="ref"> (see April 18, 1916)</span>.</p>
<p id="N80930">The German auxiliary cruiser <i><span class="vessel">Wolf</span></i> returns successfully to port after raiding commerce for fifteen months consecutively.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-02-25" id="N80936">Feb. 25 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N80941">The first compulsory rationing comes into force in Great Britain (in London and the Home Counties).</p>
<p id="N80944"><span class="theatre">Russia</span>:—The Germans occupy Reval and Pskoff.</p>
<p id="N80950">Venice is heavily bombarded by Austrian airmen.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-02-26" id="N80953">Feb. 26 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N80958"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—The British occupy Rujm-el-Bahr (on the north shore of the Dead Sea) and the Mandesi ford of the Jordan.</p>
<p id="N80964">The British hospital ship <i><span class="vessel">Glenart Castle</span></i> is sunk by a submarine in the Bristol Channel (162 lives lost).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-03-01" id="N80970">Mar. 1 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N80975">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Calgarian</span></i> (armed merchant cruiser) is sunk by a submarine off the coast of Ireland (67 lives lost).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-03-02" id="N80981">Mar. 2 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N80986">Peace is signed at Brest-Litovsk between the Central Powers and Russia.</p>
<p id="N80989">Roumania announces her submission to an ultimatum from the Central Powers requiring her to enter into peace negotiations.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-03-03" id="N80992">Mar. 3 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N80997">Kieff is occupied by the Germans; the German military operations in Russia now cease.</p>
<p id="N81000"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—<span class="person">General Allenby</span> advances on a front of 12 miles to a depth of 3000 yards between Jerusalem and Shechem.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-03-05" id="N81006">Mar. 5 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N81011">The preliminaries of a treaty of peace are signed between the Central Powers and Roumania.</p>
<p id="N81014">German forces occupy the Aland Islands at the request of the Government of Finland.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-03-06" id="N81017">Mar. 6 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N81022">Death of <span class="person">Mr. John Redmond</span>, the leader of the Irish National Party.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-03-07" id="N81025">Mar. 7 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N81030">A treaty of peace is signed between Germany and Finland.</p>
<p id="N81033"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—<span class="person">General Allenby</span> advances on a front of 18 miles to a depth of 3 miles across the Jerusalem-Shechem road.</p>
<p id="N81039">A raid on a moonless night by German aeroplanes on London (20 killed); one raider is destroyed.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-03-08" id="N81042">Mar. 8 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N81047">A German aeroplane raid on Paris (13 killed): one raider is destroyed.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-03-09" id="N81050">Mar. 9 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N81055"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—A further advance by the British, who force the passage of the River Auja.</p>
<p id="N81061"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—Hit, on the Euphrates, is occupied by the British under <span class="person">General Marshall</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-03-10" id="N81067">Mar. 10 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N81072">The British hospital ship <i><span class="vessel">Guildford Castle</span></i> is torpedoed in the Bristol Channel but succeeds in making port.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-03-11" id="N81078">Mar. 11 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N81083">The Germans raid the Western Front at a number of points.</p>
<p id="N81086"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—A further advance by the British astride the Jerusalem-Shechem road.</p>
<p id="N81092"><span class="theatre">Caucasus</span>:—Erzerum is reoccupied by the Turks<span class="ref"> (see Feb. 16, 1916.)</span></p>
<p id="N81101">Paris is attacked by 60 German aeroplanes; four of the raiders are destroyed.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-03-12" id="N81104">Mar. 12 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N81109">German forces land at Abo in Finland.</p>
<p id="N81112"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—The British advance near the coast.</p>
<p id="N81118">A Zeppelin raid on the Yorkshire coast (one killed).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-03-13" id="N81121">Mar. 13 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N81126">The Germans occupy Odessa.</p>
<p id="N81129">A Zeppelin raid on Hartlepool (eight killed).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-03-14" id="N81132">Mar. 14 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N81137"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—The British gain important positions commanding the Nablus road.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-03-15" id="N81143">Mar. 15 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N81148"><span class="person">Prince Lichnowsky</span>'s memoir, dealing with the causes that led to the war, is published in Sweden.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-03-17" id="N81151">Mar. 17 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N81156">Nikolaief, the Russian naval yard on the Black Sea, is occupied by the Germans.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-03-18" id="N81159">Mar. 18 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N81164">The Germans bombard the Belgian Front and make a number of attacks there which are repulsed.</p>
<p id="N81167">A British air-raid on Mannheim.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-03-19" id="N81170">Mar. 19 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N81175"><span class="theatre">Great Britain</span>:—<span class="person">Lord Pirrie</span> is appointed Controller-General of Merchant Shipbuilding.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-03-21" id="N81181">Mar. 21 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N81186">The great German offensive on the Western Front begins (the second Battle of the Somme; see April 5): the Germans attack, with immense weight of troops, the British Third and Fifth Armies on a fifty-mile front between the Scarpe and the Oise; they carry the British front-line positions over large sectors and penetrate more deeply at certain points.</p>
<p id="N81189">Eighteen German destroyers raid Dunkirk. They are met by an Anglo-French flotilla consisting of two British destroyers (<i><span class="vessel">Botha</span></i> and <i><span class="vessel">Morris</span></i>) and three French destroyers, under the command of H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Botha</span></i>. Three German destroyers are sunk and one disabled.</p>
<p id="N81201">British monitors bombard Ostend.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-03-22" id="N81204">Mar. 22 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N81209">The German offensive continues: the British line is broken west of St. Quentin but holds further north; the British fall back towards the line of the Somme; the Germans claim 16,000 prisoners and 200 guns.</p>
<p id="N81212"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—<span class="person">General Allenby</span> crosses the Jordan and advances towards the Hedjaz railway.</p>
<p id="N81218">The British mine-sweeping sloop <i><span class="vessel">Gaillardia</span></i> is sunk by a mine in the North Sea (68 lives lost).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-03-23" id="N81224">Mar. 23 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N81229">The peace treaties concluded by the German Government are adopted by the German Reichstag.</p>
<p id="N81232">The British fall back on new positions west and south-west of St. Quentin, 15 miles in rear of those held at the beginning of the offensive; the French enter the battle at Noyon, on the right of the British; the Germans claim 25,000 prisoners and 400 guns to date.</p>
<p id="N81235">Paris is shelled by a long-range gun from a distance of 74 miles.</p>
<p id="N81238">British air-raids on Bruges docks and Metz.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-03-24" id="N81241">Mar. 24 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N81246">The Germans recapture Bapaume, Péronne, Nesle, Ham, and Chauny; they claim 30,000 prisoners and 600 guns to date.</p>
<p id="N81249">A British air-raid on Cologne.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-03-25" id="N81252">Mar. 25 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N81257">The Germans make further progress between Arras and Péronne and at other points further south; near Maricourt they reach their line of July 1916; the French evacuate Noyon.</p>
<p id="N81260"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—<span class="person">General Allenby</span> captures Es Salt and advances towards Amman on the Hedjaz railway<span class="ref"> (see April 1 and 30)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-03-26" id="N81270">Mar. 26 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N81275"><span class="person">General Foch</span> assumes supreme control of the Allied Armies in France.</p>
<p id="N81278">The British line runs from in front of Arras south-west to Albert and thence south, behind the defences of 1916, to Bray; south of the Somme the Germans capture Chaulnes and Roye; the Germans claim to have taken to date 963 guns and to have destroyed 100 tanks.</p>
<p id="N81281"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—British mounted troops approach Amman on the Hedjaz railway<span class="ref"> (see April 1)</span>.</p>
<p id="N81291"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—<span class="person">General Marshall</span> defeats the Turks at Khan Baghdadie and takes 3000 prisoners.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-03-27" id="N81297">Mar. 27 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N81302">The northern sectors of the British battle-line hold; the Germans capture Albert and in the valley of the Ancre are within 12 miles of Amiens; further south they capture Montdidier (between Amiens and Compiègne); German attacks are repulsed near Lassigny and Noyon.</p>
<p id="N81305"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—The British destroy portions of the Hedjaz railway north and south of Amman.</p>
<p id="N81311">The British destroyer <i><span class="vessel">Kale</span></i> is sunk by a mine in the North Sea.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-03-28" id="N81317">Mar. 28 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N81322">Strong German attacks on the British positions east and south-east of Arras are repulsed with heavy loss, but further south the Germans reach Hamel in their advance on Amiens.</p>
<p id="N81325"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—The British attack Amman, but make little progress.</p>
<p id="N81331">British destroyers capture and sink three German armed trawlers in the Heligoland Bight. H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Tithonus</span></i> (armed boarding-steamer) is sunk by a submarine in the North Sea.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-03-29" id="N81337">Mar. 29 (Good Friday)</p>
<p id="N81342">The Germans make further progress towards Amiens between the Ancre and the Avre.</p>
<p id="N81345">During the bombardment of Paris by the German long-range gun, a church is hit while a Good Friday service is in progress and many casualties are caused.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-03-30" id="N81348">Mar. 30 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N81353">German attacks on the British Front north of the Somme (in the Boiry—Boyelles district) are repulsed with heavy loss. The French recapture Moreuil (south-east of Amiens).</p>
<p id="N81356"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—The British attack on Amman is renewed with slight success.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-04-01" id="N81362">April 1 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N81367"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—The British retire from before Amman and evacuate Es Salt<span class="ref"> (see March 25)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-04-02" id="N81377">April 2 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N81382">The British recapture Ayette (between Arras and Albert).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-04-04" id="N81385">April 4 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N81390">The Germans attack in great strength towards Amiens; they advance considerably on either side of Moreuil (south-east of Amiens); the French lose Morisel and Mailly-Raineval. The Germans claim to have taken 90,000 prisoners and 1300 guns since March 21.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-04-05" id="N81393">April 5 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N81398">The British and French defences hold against strong German attacks; the Germans make little progress and suffer heavy losses; the French regain ground between Moreuil and Montdidier; this ends the second Battle of the Somme<span class="ref"> (see March 21)</span>.</p>
<p id="N81405">British and Japanese marines under the command of <span class="person">Admiral Kato</span> are landed at Vladivostok.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-04-06" id="N81408">April 6 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N81413">The British recapture Aveluy Wood, north of Albert; the French yield ground near Chauny.</p>
<p id="N81416"><span class="theatre">The Caucasus</span>:—The Turks reoccupy Ardahan<span class="ref"> (see Jan. 3, 1915)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-04-07" id="N81426">April 7 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N81431"><span class="theatre">Syria</span>:—The Arabs capture Kerak, the Turkish headquarters east of the Dead Sea.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-04-08" id="N81437">April 8 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N81442">The Germans bombard the whole British Front in the battle area and northwards to Armentières.</p>
<p id="N81445">The French retire in the Coucy district, south of the Oise.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-04-09" id="N81448">April 9 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N81453">The Germans attack in great strength on a ten-mile front between La Bassée and Armentières; they penetrate the centre of this sector, which is held by the Portuguese, and widen the gap made (the Battle of the Lys: see April 29).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-04-10" id="N81456">April 10 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N81461">The new German offensive extends northwards; the British are forced back on the Messines Ridge and in front of Ploegsteert Wood; south of Armentières the Germans cross the Lys.</p>
<p id="N81464"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—The Turks attack in the coastal sector; they are repulsed and the British line is advanced at some points.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-04-11" id="N81470">April 11 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N81475">There is fierce fighting on the Messines Ridge, where the British 9th Division repulses strong enemy attacks; below Armentières the Germans rapidly deepen and widen the salient they have created; they capture Armentières and Merville, and force back the British to a line behind Ploegsteert, Steenwerck, and Estaires; German attacks on the lines covering Béthune are repulsed with heavy loss; the Germans claim 20,000 prisoners and over 200 guns in this battle to date.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-04-12" id="N81478">April 12 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N81483">The Germans strike northwards from the salient; they reach Bailleul and capture Neuve Eglise; the British withdraw from the Messines Ridge; further south the Germans cross the Lawe and threaten St. Venant.</p>
<p id="N81486">A Zeppelin raid on the east coast of England and the Midlands (five killed).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-04-13" id="N81489">April 13 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N81494">The British repulse German attacks from Météren to Wulverghem and recapture Neuve Eglise.</p>
<p id="N81497"><span class="theatre">The Caucasus</span>:—The Turks capture Batoum and 3000 prisoners.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-04-14" id="N81503">April 14 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N81508">The British withdraw from Neuve Eglise.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-04-15" id="N81511">April 15 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N81516">The resignation is announced of <span class="person">Count Czernin</span>, the Austrian Foreign Minister, following on the publication by <span class="person">M. Clemenceau</span> of a letter by <span class="person">Emperor Karl</span>, dealing with the claims of France to Alsace-Lorraine.</p>
<p id="N81519">The Germans capture Bailleul and Wulverghem.</p>
<p id="N81522">A British naval force sinks ten German trawlers in the Kattegat; their crews are saved.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-04-16" id="N81525">April 16 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N81530">The British withdraw from the Passchendaele Ridge.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-04-17" id="N81533">April 17 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N81538"><span class="person">Bolo Pasha</span> is shot at Vincennes<span class="ref"> (see Feb. 14)</span>.</p>
<p id="N81545">The Belgians repulse German attacks near Bixschoote and capture 700 prisoners.</p>
<p id="N81548">The British withdraw from Wytschaete and lose Météren; a German attack on Kemmel Hill is completely repulsed by the British; French reinforcements enter the battle along the ridge south-west of Ypres.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-04-18" id="N81551">April 18 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N81556"><span class="person">Lord Milner</span> succeeds <span class="person">Lord Derby</span> as British Secretary of State for War.</p>
<p id="N81559">The Germans attack in strength from Givenchy to the Lys and are repulsed with heavy loss.</p>
<p id="N81562">The French attack in the Avre Valley, south-east of Amiens, and advance to the outskirts of Castel.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-04-19" id="N81565">April 19 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N81570">The British gain ground at Givenchy and Festubert.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-04-20" id="N81573">April 20 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N81578">British and German light naval forces are engaged in the Bight of Heligoland.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-04-23" id="N81581">April 23 (Tues.) St. George's Day.</p>
<p id="N81586">Guatemala declares war on Germany.</p>
<p id="N81589">The Germans attack on the Amiens Front, at the junction of the French and British armies; they capture the village of Villers-Bréttoneux from the British but elsewhere are repulsed.</p>
<p id="N81592">British naval forces (<span class="person">Vice-Admiral Sir Roger Keyes</span> in chief command) raid Zeebrugge and Ostend in the early morning with a view to blocking the entrances to the harbours. Storming parties land on the Mole at Zeebrugge, while three obsolete cruisers, the <i><span class="vessel">Intrepid</span></i>, <i><span class="vessel">Thetis</span></i>, and <i><span class="vessel">Iphigenia</span></i>, filled with concrete enter the harbour; these are sunk at the entrance of the Bruges Canal. Two other block ships, the <i><span class="vessel">Brilliant</span></i> and <i><span class="vessel">Sirius</span></i>, are sunk near the entrance to the harbour at Ostend. In the action at Zeebrugge the British destroyer <i><span class="vessel">North Star</span></i> is sunk.</p>
<p id="N81613">The famous German airman, <span class="person">Baron von Richthoven</span>, is shot down in the Somme Valley.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-04-24" id="N81616">April 24 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N81621">On the Amiens Front the British recapture Villers-Bréttoneux.</p>
<p id="N81624"><span class="theatre">Syria</span>:—Arab forces seize 53 miles of the Hedjaz railway south of Maan.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-04-25" id="N81630">April 25 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N81635">The Germans capture Kemmel Hill.</p>
<p id="N81638">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Cowslip</span></i> (sloop) is sunk by a submarine off Cape Spartel.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-04-26" id="N81644">April 26 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N81649">German attacks at Locre and Voormezeele are repulsed.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-04-27" id="N81652">April 27 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N81657"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—<span class="person">General Marshall</span> captures Kifri.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-04-29" id="N81663">April 29 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N81668">The Germans attack in strength the British and French positions on a ten-mile front between Météren and Voormezeele and are severely defeated; this ends the Battle of the Lys<span class="ref"> (see April 9)</span>.</p>
<p id="N81675"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—<span class="person">General Marshall</span> defeats the Turks at Tuz Khartmatli, half-way between Baghdad and Mosul, taking 300 prisoners and 6 guns.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-04-30" id="N81681">April 30 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N81686"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—<span class="person">General Allenby</span> again advances towards the Hedjaz railway, and recaptures Es Salt<span class="ref"> (see April 1)</span>.</p>
<p id="N81696"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—<span class="person">General Marshall</span> reaches the Tank River and captures 12 more guns and many more prisoners.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-05-01" id="N81702">May 1 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N81707">The Germans create a military dictatorship in the Ukraine; <span class="person">Field Marshal von Eichhorn</span> breaks up the Ukranian Rada and establishes a German military Government at Kieff.</p>
<p id="N81710"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—The British suffer a reverse between Jisr-ed-Damieh and Es Salt and lose 9 guns.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-05-02" id="N81716">May 2 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N81721">The French make progress on the Avre.</p>
<p id="N81724">British airmen bomb the lock-gates at Zeebrugge.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-05-03" id="N81727">May 3 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N81732"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—<span class="person">General Allenby</span> is compelled to withdraw his forces to the west bank of the Jordan.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-05-05" id="N81738">May 5 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N81743"><span class="person">Lord French</span> is appointed Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland.</p>
<p id="N81746">The British gain ground in the angle between the Ancre and the Somme.</p>
<p id="N81749"><span class="theatre">East Africa</span>:—A British success near Manunga (160 miles south of Lake Nyassa).</p>
<p id="N81755">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Rhododendron</span></i> (sloop) is sunk by a submarine in the North Sea.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-05-07" id="N81761">May 7 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N81766">The Peace of Bucharest is signed between the Central Powers and Roumania.</p>
<p id="N81769"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—<span class="person">General Marshall</span> occupies Kirkuk (110 miles south-east of Mosul)<span class="ref"> (see May 24)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-05-08" id="N81779">May 8 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N81784">Nicaragua declares war on Germany.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-05-10" id="N81787">May 10 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N81792">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Vindictive</span></i> (obsolete cruiser), damaged in the raid on Zeebrugge, is successfully sunk across the entrance to Ostend harbour.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-05-11" id="N81798">May 11 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N81803"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—The British, advancing along the Baghdad-Mosul road, drive the Turks across the Lesser Zab (70 miles from Mosul).</p>
<p id="N81809">A British submarine destroys a German submarine of the 'cruiser' type.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-05-14" id="N81812">May 14 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N81817">An Italian motor boat enters the port of Pola and sinks an Austrian battleship.</p>
<p id="N81820">The British destroyer <i><span class="vessel">Phœnix</span></i> is sunk by a submarine in the Adriatic.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-05-15" id="N81826">May 15 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N81831">The French advance their line north of Kemmel Hill.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-05-16" id="N81834">May 16 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N81839">A British air-raid on Saarbrücken.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-05-17" id="N81842">May 17 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N81847"><span class="theatre">Great Britain</span>:—A number of Sinn Fein leaders are arrested in connection with the discovery of a German-Irish plot.</p>
<p id="N81853"><span class="theatre">Albania</span>:—French and Italian forces advance on a sixteen-mile front.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-05-18" id="N81859">May 18 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N81864">British airmen raid Cologne by daylight.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-05-19" id="N81867">May 19 (Whit Sunday)</p>
<p id="N81872">Ville-sur-Ancre is captured by Australian troops.</p>
<p id="N81875">The Italians capture Austrian positions at Capo Sile (north of the Venetian lagoons).</p>
<p id="N81878">A night raid by German aeroplanes on London (44 killed); five of the raiders are destroyed.</p>
<p id="N81881">German airmen bomb a group of British hospitals at Etaples and cause many casualties.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-05-20" id="N81884">May 20 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N81889">The French gain ground near Locre.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-05-21" id="N81892">May 21 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N81897">A German aeroplane raid on Paris (three killed); one raider is brought down.</p>
<p id="N81900">A British air-raid on Mannheim.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-05-22" id="N81903">May 22 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N81908">A German aeroplane raid on Paris (one killed).</p>
<p id="N81911">British airmen raid Zeebrugge and sink a German destroyer.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-05-23" id="N81914">May 23 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N81919">Costa Rica declares war on the Central Powers.</p>
<p id="N81922">The British armed merchant cruiser <i><span class="vessel">Moldavia</span></i>, while transporting American troops, is sunk by a submarine in the English Channel (56 lives lost).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-05-24" id="N81928">May 24 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N81933"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamia</span>:—The British withdraw from Kirkuk<span class="ref"> (see May 7 and Oct. 25)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-05-26" id="N81943">May 26 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N81948">The Italians capture the Monticello Pass (in the Adamello district) with 870 prisoners and 12 guns.</p>
<p id="N81951">The British transport <i><span class="vessel">Leasowe Castle</span></i> is sunk by a submarine in the Mediterranean (92 lives lost).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-05-27" id="N81957">May 27 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N81962">The Third Battle of the Aisne<span class="ref"> (see June 2)</span>: the Germans launch an offensive north-west of Rheims; they carry the whole line of the Chemin-des-Dames and advance rapidly to the Aisne, which they cross on a front of eighteen miles; on the left of the German attack British troops hold their ground north of Rheims.</p>
<p id="N81969">Between Locre and Voormezeele the French repulse a German attack.</p>
<p id="N81972">The bombardment of Paris by long-range guns is renewed.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-05-28" id="N81975">May 28 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N81980">The Germans advance rapidly south of the Aisne; they force the line of the Vesle.</p>
<p id="N81983">American troops capture a German salient at Cantigny, north-west of Montdidier.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-05-29" id="N81986">May 29 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N81991">The Germans capture the Vrégny Plateau and Soissons<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 2)</span>, and advance south of the Vesle.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-05-30" id="N81998">May 30 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N82003">The Germans reach Fère-en-Tardenois.</p>
<p id="N82006"><span class="theatre">Macedonian Front</span>:—Greek troops make a successful attack at Skra di Legen (west of the Vardar and near the Serbian border) and capture 1500 prisoners.</p>
<p id="N82012">May 31, (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N82015">The Germans reach the Marne from Château-Thierry to Dormans; they claim to have captured 45,000 prisoners and 400 guns since May 27.</p>
<p id="N82018">The American transport <i><span class="vessel">President Lincoln</span></i> is sunk by a submarine in European waters.</p>
<p id="N82024">The British destroyer <i><span class="vessel">Fairy</span></i> is sunk after ramming and destroying a submarine in the North Sea.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-06-01" id="N82030">June 1 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N82035">The Germans attack at various points between the Oise and the Marne and gain ground slightly; down the valley of the Ourcq the Germans advance to the edge of the Forest of Villers-Cotterets, 40 miles from Paris.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-06-02" id="N82038">June 2 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N82043">The end of the Third Battle of the Aisne<span class="ref"> (see May 27)</span>: German attacks near Château-Thierry make little impression on the French defence; at several points between the Ourcq and the Marne the French counter-attack and gain ground.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-06-03" id="N82050">June 3 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N82055"><span class="theatre">The Lys Front</span>:—Mont de Merris (west of Merris village) is captured by the British.</p>
<p id="N82061">The Germans attack in considerable strength north of the Aisne, between Soissons and Noyon, but make slight progress.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-06-05" id="N82064">June 5 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N82069">A German attack at Longpont and an attempt by the Germans to cross the Oise near Vingres are defeated.</p>
<p id="N82072">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Snaefell</span></i> (armed boarding-steamer) is sunk by a submarine in the Mediterranean.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-06-06" id="N82078">June 6 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N82083">French, British, and American troops counter-attack and regain ground at various points.</p>
<p id="N82086">The Dutch hospital ship <i><span class="vessel">Koningin Regentes</span></i>, engaged in carrying repatriated prisoners between England and Holland, is sunk by a submarine (four lives lost).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-06-07" id="N82092">June 7 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N82097">French, British, and American troops again counter-attack successfully; the British regain Bligny, near Rheims; the French and Americans recapture Vinly and Veuilly-la-Poterie.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-06-08" id="N82100">June 8 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N82105">A Conference of British and German delegates, to deal with questions relating to prisoners of war, opens at the Hague.</p>
<p id="N82108"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—The British capture Turkish positions near the coast.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-06-09" id="N82114">June 9 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N82119">The First Battle of Lassigny<span class="ref"> (see June 13)</span>: a new German offensive is launched on a front of 22 miles between Noyon and Montdidier.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-06-10" id="N82126">June 10 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N82131">In their new offensive the Germans make progress, at great expense in casualties, towards Estrées St. Denis (west of Compiègne) and Ribécourt (south-west of Noyon); they capture Méry, Belloy, and St. Maur.</p>
<p id="N82134"><span class="theatre">The Somme Front</span>:—Australian troops make progress south of Morlancourt.</p>
<p id="N82140">Italian torpedo-boats destroy an Austrian battleship, the <i><span class="vessel">Szent Istvan</span></i>, in the Adriatic.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-06-11" id="N82146">June 11 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N82151">The French counter-attack on a seven-mile front from Rubescourt to St. Maur; they recapture Belloy.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-06-12" id="N82154">June 12 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N82159">The Germans attack between the Aisne and the forest of Villers-Cotterets towards Compiègne and make some progress.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-06-13" id="N82162">June 13 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N82167">The end of the First Battle of Lassigny<span class="ref"> (see June 9)</span>: the Germans are held in check on the whole front between Noyon and Montdidier; they lose part of the ground won by them on the previous day in the direction of Compiègne.</p>
<p id="N82174">The Italians defeat the Austrians at the Tonale Pass.</p>
<p id="N82177"><span class="theatre">East Africa</span>:—The British occupy Malema.</p>
<p id="N82183">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Patia</span></i> (armed merchant-cruiser) is sunk by a submarine in the Bristol Channel.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-06-14" id="N82189">June 14 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N82194"><span class="theatre">Northern Persia</span>:—Tabriz is reoccupied by the Turks<span class="ref"> (see Jan. 30, 1915)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-06-15" id="N82204">June 15 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N82209"><span class="theatre">Italy</span>:—The Austrians launch an offensive on a front of 90 miles, from the Asiago Plateau to the sea; on the Asiago Plateau the British maintain their ground, and elsewhere the Austrians are either repulsed or make only slight progress; they cross the Piave at two points.</p>
<p id="N82215">A German aeroplane raid on Paris.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-06-16" id="N82218">June 16 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N82223"><span class="theatre">Italy</span>:—The Austrians capture Capo Sile (north of the Venetian lagoons).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-06-17" id="N82229">June 17 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N82234"><span class="theatre">Italy</span>:—The Austrian offensive, which has met with little success, is definitely checked and the Allies begin to regain ground.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-06-18" id="N82240">June 18 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N82245"><span class="theatre">Italy</span>:—Capo Sile is recaptured by the Italians; further Austrian attempts to cross the Piave, which is in flood, are defeated.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-06-19" id="N82251">June 19 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N82256"><span class="theatre">Italy</span>:—The Austrians are driven back in the Montello sector.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-06-20" id="N82262">June 20 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N82267"><span class="theatre">Italy</span>:—The Italians complete the capture of Costalunga Redoubt and regain ground on the Montello and at other points.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-06-21" id="N82273">June 21 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N82278">The British Government announce the abandonment for the present of Home Rule and Conscription in their policy towards Ireland.</p>
<p id="N82281"><span class="theatre">Italy</span>:—Austrian attacks in the Montello and Grappa areas are repulsed.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-06-22" id="N82287">June 22 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N82292"><span class="theatre">Italy</span>:—The Austrians begin to withdraw with difficulty across the flooded Piave.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-06-23" id="N82298">June 23 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N82303">The British gain ground south of Météren.</p>
<p id="N82306">Italian troops repulse a German attack on Bligny Crest, near Rheims.</p>
<p id="N82309"><span class="theatre">Italy</span>:—The Austrians recross the Piave in disorder pursued by the Italians; the Allies recover the whole of the right bank of the Piave except a small portion opposite San Dona di Piave.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-06-24" id="N82315">June 24 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N82320"><span class="theatre">Italy</span>:—The Italians clear the right bank of the Piave of the enemy and cross in places to the left bank; they capture many prisoners.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-06-25" id="N82326">June 25 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N82331">American troops attack and defeat the Germans in a sharp engagement north-west of Château-Thierry; they take over 200 prisoners.</p>
<p id="N82334"><span class="theatre">Italy</span>:—The Italians capture the Austrian bridge-head at Capo Sile.</p>
<p id="N82340">A British air-raid on Karlsruhe.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-06-26" id="N82343">June 26 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N82348">The British capture a German position west of Vieux Berquin.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-06-27" id="N82351">June 27 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N82356"><span class="person">General Franchet D'Esperey</span> succeeds <span class="person">General Guillaumet</span> in command of the Allied forces at Salonika.</p>
<p id="N82359">The British hospital ship <i><span class="vessel">Llandovery Castle</span></i> is sunk by a submarine 116 miles south-west of the Fastnet (234 lives lost).</p>
<p id="N82365">A German aeroplane raid on Paris (11 killed).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-06-28" id="N82368">June 28 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N82373">The British make progress on a front of 6000 yards east of the forest of Nieppe and capture over 400 prisoners.</p>
<p id="N82376">The French advance between the Aisne and the forest of Villers-Cotterets and take over 1000 prisoners.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-06-29" id="N82379">June 29 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N82384">The Italians capture Monte di Val Bella (on the Asiago Plateau) with 800 prisoners.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-06-30" id="N82387">June 30 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N82392">The Italians capture the Col del Rosso (on the Asiago Plateau) with 2000 prisoners.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-07-01" id="N82395">July 1 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N82400">The French capture St. Pierre Aigle; the Americans capture Vaux (near Château-Thierry) with 450 prisoners.</p>
<p id="N82403">The American transport <i><span class="vessel">Corrington</span></i> is sunk by a submarine (six lives lost).</p>
<p id="N82409">British aeroplanes bomb the Austrian naval base at Cattaro with great effect.</p>
<p id="N82412">A British air-raid on Mannheim.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-07-02" id="N82415">July 2 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N82420"><span class="theatre">Italy</span>:—The Italians advance on the Lower Piave and capture 1900 prisoners; they also make important progress on Monte Grappa.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-07-03" id="N82426">July 3 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N82431">Death of <span class="person">Viscount Rhondda</span>, the British Food Controller<span class="ref"> (see July 9, and June 15, 1917)</span>.</p>
<p id="N82438">Death of <span class="person">Mohmed V.</span>, the Sultan of Turkey.</p>
<p id="N82441">The French advance between Autrèches and Moulin-sous-Touvent and capture over 1000 prisoners.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-07-04" id="N82444">July 4 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N82449">A hundred merchant ships are launched in the U.S.A. to celebrate Independence Day; the day is celebrated in London and the Dominions, in Paris, and in Rome.</p>
<p id="N82452">Australian troops, assisted by Americans, capture Hamel (between Villers-Brétonneux and the Somme), and the woods south of it, with over 1500 prisoners.</p>
<p id="N82455"><span class="theatre">Italy</span>:—The Italians make further progress on the Lower Piave and on Mount Grappa.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-07-05" id="N82461">July 5 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N82466">The Australians advance on a front of 2000 yards north-east of Villers-Brétonneux.</p>
<p id="N82469"><span class="theatre">Southern Albania</span>:—An offensive is launched by the French and Italians.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-07-06" id="N82475">July 6 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N82480">The Silver Wedding day of <span class="person">King George V.</span> and <span class="person">Queen Mary</span> of England.</p>
<p id="N82483"><span class="person">Count Mirbach</span>, the German Ambassador at Moscow, is assassinated.</p>
<p id="N82486"><span class="theatre">Italy</span>:—The Italians clear the Austrians from the Piave delta.</p>
<p id="N82492"><span class="theatre">Southern Albania</span>:—The French and Italians make rapid progress between the coast and the Tomorica Valley.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-07-07" id="N82498">July 7 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N82503">The Australians advance on either side of the Somme on a front of 3000 yards.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-07-08" id="N82506">July 8 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N82511"><span class="theatre">Southern Albania</span>:—The French and Italians continue to advance, assisted in the coast sector by British monitors.</p>
<p id="N82517"><span class="theatre">Siberia</span>:—Czecho-Slovak forces temporarily occupy Irkutsk<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 17)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-07-09" id="N82527">July 9 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N82532"><span class="person">Mr. J. R. Clynes</span> succeeds <span class="person">Lord Rhondda</span> as British Food Controller<span class="ref"> (see July 3)</span>.</p>
<p id="N82539">The resignation is announced of <span class="person">Herr von Kühlmann</span>, the German Foreign Minister; he is succeeded by <span class="person">Admiral von Hintze</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-07-10" id="N82542">July 10 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N82547">The French capture Courcy, north of the Ourcq.</p>
<p id="N82550"><span class="theatre">Southern Albania</span>:—The Italians capture Berat<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 26)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-07-12" id="N82560">July 12 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N82565"><span class="theatre">Albania</span>:—The Austrians retreat before the French and Italians.</p>
<p id="N82571">The Japanese dreadnought <i><span class="vessel">Kawachi</span></i> is blown up in Tokuyama Bay with a loss of over 500 lives.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-07-14" id="N82577">July 14 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N82582"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—The Turks attack the British on the Jordan and north of Jericho and are repulsed.</p>
<p id="N82588">The French liner <i><span class="vessel">Djemnah</span></i> is sunk by a submarine in the Mediterranean with a loss of 442 lives.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-07-15" id="N82594">July 15 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N82599">The Second Battle of the Marne begins<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 4)</span>: the Germans launch an offensive on a front of 50 miles, east and west of Rheims; west of Rheims, between Vrigny and Château-Thierry, they penetrate the Allied positions to a depth of several miles in places and capture Chezy and other villages; east of Rheims they carry the French outpost positions but are held on the main line of defence; they cross the Marne at Fossoy and other points.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-07-16" id="N82606">July 16 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N82611">French and American troops regain ground south of the Marne and capture high ground overlooking the Marne Valley.</p>
<p id="N82614">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Anchusa</span></i> (sloop) is sunk by a submarine off the north coast of Ireland.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-07-17" id="N82620">July 17 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N82625">The Germans make progress towards Epernay and reach Montroison; east of Rheims they are defeated and driven back south of Prunay.</p>
<p id="N82628">In the Somme area the Australians again make progress east of Villers-Brétonneux<span class="ref"> (see July 5 and 7)</span>.</p>
<p id="N82635">The Cunard liner <i><span class="vessel">Carpathia</span></i> is sunk by a submarine west of Ireland (five lives lost).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-07-18" id="N82641">July 18 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N82646">The turning-point which leads to complete victory: the French counter-attack on a front of 35 miles between Belleau (5 miles north-west of Château-Thierry) and Vingres (north-west of Soissons); on the left, under <span class="person">General Mangin</span>, they reach the Mont de Paris, near Soissons; in the valley of the Crise, they advance to a depth of 8 miles and capture 5000 prisoners and 30 guns. Further south they attack in co-operation with American troops, advance to a depth of 5 miles, and regain more than 20 villages; east of Rheims the French under <span class="person">General Gouraud</span> recapture Prunay.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-07-19" id="N82649">July 19 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N82654"><span class="theatre">The Lys Front</span>:—The British recapture Météren<span class="ref"> (see April 17)</span>.</p>
<p id="N82664">The French and Americans continue to attack between Soissons and Château-Thierry and approach the Soissons—Château-Thierry road; south of the Marne the Germans also yield ground.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-07-20" id="N82667">July 20 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N82672">The Germans withdraw across the Marne (on the night of the 19th-20th); the Allied captures since the counter-stroke exceed 20,000 prisoners and 400 guns.</p>
<p id="N82675">The White Star liner <i><span class="vessel">Justicia</span></i> is sunk by submarines off the north coast of Ireland after fighting for twenty-four hours (16 lives lost); one of the submarines is sunk by the British destroyer <i><span class="vessel">Marne</span></i>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-07-21" id="N82684">July 21 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N82689">The French recapture Château-Thierry; British, French, and Italian troops advance between the Marne and Rheims down the valley of the Ardre; they capture Courton Wood.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-07-22" id="N82692">July 22 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N82697">The Allies cross the Marne near Dormans, at Chassins and Passy; the Germans retreat north and south of Fère-en-Tardenois; German counter-attacks between the Marne and the Ourcq are repulsed and the French advance beyond La Croix and Epieds; east of Rheims <span class="person">General Gouraud</span> recovers all his original positions between the Suippes and Massiges.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-07-23" id="N82700">July 23 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N82705"><span class="person">Dr. von Seidler</span>, the Austrian Premier, and his Cabinet resign.</p>
<p id="N82708">The forced retreat of the Germans in the Soissons-Rheims salient continues; north of the Ourcq they are pressed back to the outskirts of Taux; south of the Ourcq the French approach Fère-en-Tardenois.</p>
<p id="N82711">On the Amiens Front the French advance towards the Avre Valley; they capture Mailly-Raineval and 1850 prisoners.</p>
<p id="N82714">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Marmora</span></i> (armed merchant cruiser) is sunk by a submarine off the south coast of Ireland (ten lives lost).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-07-24" id="N82720">July 24 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N82725">Progress is made by the Allies north of Château-Thierry towards Fère-en-Tardenois and at various other points.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-07-25" id="N82728">July 25 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N82733">The Allies capture the forest of Fère, Oulchy-le-Château and other important positions on the Marne Front.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-07-26" id="N82736">July 26 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N82741">The German retreat on the Marne Front extends.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-07-27" id="N82744">July 27 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N82749">The German retreat on the Marne Front continues.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-07-28" id="N82752">July 28 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N82757"><span class="theatre">The Marne Front</span>:—The Allies capture Fère-en-Tardenois and force the passage of the Ourcq.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-07-29" id="N82763">July 29 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N82768"><span class="theatre">The Lys Front</span>:—Australian troops capture Merris, near Météren.</p>
<p id="N82774"><span class="theatre">The Marne Front</span>:—The French capture positions north-east of Oulchy-le-Château and Grand Rozoy.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-07-30" id="N82780">July 30 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N82785"><span class="theatre">The Marne Front</span>:—The German resistance stiffens; the Allies capture Remigny and St. Gemme.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-07-31" id="N82791">July 31 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N82796"><span class="theatre">The Marne Front</span>:—The Americans capture Seringes after fierce fighting.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-08-01" id="N82802">Aug. 1 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N82807">The French and British advance north of the Ourcq and capture important high ground commanding Soissons.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-08-02" id="N82810">Aug. 2 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N82815">It is announced that <span class="person">Admiral Scheer</span> is appointed Chief of the German Admiralty Staff.</p>
<p id="N82818">The Allies recapture Soissons (lost on May 29); the Germans are again in full retreat in the Soissons-Rheims salient, closely pressed by the Allies, who advance rapidly.</p>
<p id="N82821"><span class="theatre">North Russia</span>:—Allied forces are landed at Archangel; they occupy the town and the surrounding district.</p>
<p id="N82827">Two British destroyers, <i><span class="vessel">Vehement</span></i> and <i><span class="vessel">Ariel</span></i>, are sunk by enemy mines in the North Sea (97 lives lost).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-08-03" id="N82836">Aug. 3 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N82841"><span class="theatre">The Marne Front</span>:—The Allied advance continues; the Germans are driven across the Vesle.</p>
<p id="N82847"><span class="theatre">The Albert Front</span>:—The Germans retire behind the Ancre, evacuating Hamel, Dernancourt, and other villages.</p>
<p id="N82853">British troops are landed at Vladivostok.</p>
<p id="N82856">The British ambulance transport <i><span class="vessel">Warilda</span></i> is sunk by a submarine (123 lives lost).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-08-04" id="N82862">Aug. 4 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N82867"><span class="theatre">The Marne Front</span>:—The Americans capture Fismes; the French cross the Vesle: this ends the Second Battle of the Marne<span class="ref"> (see July 15)</span>.</p>
<p id="N82877">The Germans retire on a front of ten miles south-east of Amiens.</p>
<p id="N82880"><span class="theatre">The Caspian</span>:—A British military mission reaches Baku; it is subsequently reinforced<span class="ref"> (see Sept. 14)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-08-05" id="N82890">Aug. 5 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N82895">Five Zeppelins fail in an attempt to cross the east coast of England; one of them (the <span class="notation">L70</span>) is brought down in flames at sea.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-08-06" id="N82898">Aug. 6 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N82903"><span class="person">General Foch</span> is created a Marshal of France.</p>
<p id="N82906">The Germans attack the British lines south of Morlancourt and gain ground.</p>
<p id="N82909">The British destroyer <i><span class="vessel">Comet</span></i> is sunk by a submarine in the Mediterranean.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-08-07" id="N82915">Aug. 7 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N82920">The British counter-attack and recapture the greater part of the ground lost near Morlancourt.</p>
<p id="N82923"><span class="theatre">The Marne Front</span>:—The French and Americans cross the Vesle between Braine and Fismes; the French advance north of Rheims.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-08-08" id="N82929">Aug. 8 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N82934">The Battle of Amiens begins<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 12)</span>: the 4th British Army (Rawlinson) and the 1st French Army (Débeney) attack, aided by tanks, on a front of twenty miles east of Amiens (both armies under the command of <span class="person">Sir D. Haig</span>), from the neighbourhood of Morlancourt, north of the Somme, to Braches, on the Avre; the German lines are deeply penetrated and 400 guns and over 16,000 prisoners captured. The advance attains a maximum depth of seven miles.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-08-09" id="N82941">Aug. 9 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N82946">The Franco-British advance proceeds: the British capture Rosières; the French capture Pierrepont and reach Arvillers; the battle-front extends southwards, the French attacking below Montdidier with their 3rd Army (this marks the beginning of the Second Battle of Lassigny; see Aug. 15).</p>
<p id="N82949"><span class="theatre">The Lys Front</span>:—The Germans evacuate a number of positions; the British advance between Merville and Locon to a depth of over a mile.</p>
<p id="N82955"><span class="theatre">The Rheims—Soissons Front</span>:—The Americans capture Fismettes.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-08-10" id="N82961">Aug. 10 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N82966">The Franco-British advance continues on the whole front from the Ancre to south of Montdidier; the British capture Rainecourt, Méharicourt, and Bouchoir; the French capture Montdidier.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-08-11" id="N82969">Aug. 11 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N82974">The Allies make fresh progress, particularly between the Avre and the Oise.</p>
<p id="N82977">Japanese contingents land at Vladivostok.</p>
<p id="N82980">An engagement off the Frisian coast between British naval light forces and aircraft and German aircraft: a German airship is destroyed.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-08-12" id="N82983">Aug. 12 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N82988">The end of the Battle of Amiens<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 8)</span>: it has disengaged Amiens, freed the Paris-Amiens railway, and seriously weakened the enemy's position; captures by the British during the battle amount to 21,850 prisoners and 400 guns.</p>
<p id="N82995">British airmen destroy a German airship off the Frisian coast.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-08-13" id="N82998">Aug. 13 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N83003">The Czecho-Slovaks are officially declared to be an Allied nation.</p>
<p id="N83006">The French approach Lassigny.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-08-14" id="N83009">Aug. 14 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N83014">The Germans extend their withdrawal on the Ancre Front, their whole line in this area being threatened by the British advance further south: they evacuate Beaumont Hamel, Serre, Puisieux, and Bucquoy.</p>
<p id="N83017">The French capture Ribécourt, on the Oise.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-08-15" id="N83020">Aug. 15 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N83025">The British advance across the Ancre.</p>
<p id="N83028">The French complete the capture of the Lassigny <i><span class="vessel">massif</span></i>: this ends the Second Battle of Lassigny<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 9)</span>.</p>
<p id="N83038">A German aeroplane raid on Paris.</p>
<p id="N83041">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Scott</span></i> (flotilla leader) and H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Ullswater</span></i> (destroyer) are sunk by submarine in the North Sea.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-08-16" id="N83050">Aug. 16 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N83055">The French make further progress south of Lassigny.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-08-17" id="N83058">Aug. 17 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N83063">The French (under <span class="person">General Mangin</span>) advance between the Oise and the Aisne.</p>
<p id="N83066"><span class="theatre">Siberia</span>:—The Czecho-Slovaks recapture Irkutsk, having lost it to the Bolshevists during July<span class="ref"> (see July 8)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-08-18" id="N83076">Aug. 18 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N83081"><span class="theatre">The Lys Front</span>:—The British attack on a four-mile front between Vieux Berquin and Bailleul and capture Oultersteene and over 400 prisoners.</p>
<p id="N83087">The French offensive between the Oise and Aisne develops.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-08-19" id="N83090">Aug. 19 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N83095"><span class="theatre">The Lys Front</span>:—The British capture Merville.</p>
<p id="N83101">The French advance in the Ribécourt sector towards Noyon.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-08-20" id="N83104">Aug. 20 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N83109">The French continue to advance between the Oise and the Aisne and reach Lombray; they capture over 8000 prisoners.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-08-21" id="N83112">Aug. 21 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N83117">The Battle of Bapaume begins<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 31)</span>: the British 3rd Army (<span class="person">Byng</span>) attacks on a ten-mile front between Albert and Arras; Beaucourt, Achiet-le-Petit, Courcelles, and Moyenville are captured.</p>
<p id="N83124">Between the Oise and the Aisne the French outflank Noyon, reaching the line Pontoise—Cuts—Camelin.</p>
<p id="N83127">British air-squadrons bomb Frankfurt, Cologne, Mannheim, and Trèves (night of Aug. 21-22).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-08-22" id="N83130">Aug. 22 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N83135">The British attack on a six-mile front between Albert and Bray; they capture Albert and penetrate the German positions to a depth of two miles.</p>
<p id="N83138">The French continue to advance south of the Oise and capture St. Aubin and Pommières.</p>
<p id="N83141">The Austrians launch a counter-offensive in Albania.</p>
<p id="N83144">The Bolshevists defeat the Trans-Caspian forces and capture Merv.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-08-23" id="N83147">Aug. 23 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N83152">The British attack and advance on a thirty-mile front from Mercatel (5 miles south of Arras) to Lihons (8 miles south of the Somme): they capture Boyelles, Hamelincourt, Ervillers, Gommiécourt, and Achiet-le-Grand in the northern sector of the attack, and in the south Chuignolles and Chuignes.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-08-24" id="N83155">Aug. 24 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N83160">The British continue to make rapid progress in the Bapaume area: they capture Biefvillers and reach the outskirts of Bapaume at Avesnes; nearer Albert they capture Thiepval and the Thiepval ridge, Pozières, Courcellette and Martinpuich; further south they capture Bray.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-08-25" id="N83163">Aug. 25 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N83168">The British advance continues: the whole of the road between Albert and Bapaume is captured (with Le Sars and Warlencourt), also Le Barque, Mametz, and other ruined villages; the prisoners captured since the battle began exceed 17,000.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-08-26" id="N83171">Aug. 26 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N83176">The British offensive develops northwards; this marks the beginning of the Battle of the Scarpe<span class="ref"> (see Sept. 3)</span>; the British attack along both banks of the Scarpe and advance to the line south-of-Gavrelle—Rœux—Wancourt—Monchy.</p>
<p id="N83183"><span class="theatre">Albania</span>:—The Austrians recapture Berat and Fieri<span class="ref"> (see July 10 and Oct. 1)</span>.</p>
<p id="N83193"><span class="theatre">The Caspian</span>:—The Turks attack Baku and are repulsed by British and local troops<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 4)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-08-27" id="N83203">Aug. 27 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N83208">The British make progress north of the Scarpe and capture Gavrelle; further south, amongst other places, they capture Beugnatre, Longueval, Delville Wood, and Maricourt.</p>
<p id="N83211">The French capture Roye.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-08-28" id="N83214">Aug. 28 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N83219">The Germans retreat at most points on the whole front between the Scarpe and the Aisne; the British and the French advance; the latter occupy Chaulnes and Nesle.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-08-29" id="N83222">Aug. 29 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N83227">The British capture Bapaume.</p>
<p id="N83230">The French capture Noyon, and cross the Ailette.</p>
<p id="N83233">The British Embassy at Petrograd is attacked by Bolshevist troops, and the Naval Attaché, <span class="person">Captain Cromie</span>, killed.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-08-30" id="N83236">Aug. 30 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N83241">The British cross the Somme south and west of Péronne.</p>
<p id="N83244">The Germans begin to withdraw on the Lys Front; the British occupy Bailleul.</p>
<p id="N83247">The French cross the Canal du Nord and capture Chevilly.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-08-31" id="N83250">Aug. 31 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N83255">The end of the Battle of Bapaume<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 21)</span>; this battle, by turning the flank of the German positions on the Somme, compels the enemy to withdraw from the area protected by the Somme and the Ancre; his new positions are henceforward in process of being turned from the north by the Arras offensive, which continues. In the Battle of Bapaume the British captures amount to 34,250 prisoners and 270 guns.</p>
<p id="N83262">The Germans retreat on most sectors of the entire front between Ypres and Soissons, especially on the Lys Front where they evacuate Kemmel Hill and Steenwerck.</p>
<p id="N83265"><span class="theatre">The Caspian</span>:—The Turks again attack Baku<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 26)</span> and gain ground slightly.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-09-01" id="N83275">Sept. 1 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N83280">The enforced retirement of the Germans continues: the British capture Bullecourt, Heudecourt, Bouchavesnes, Rancourt, Péronne, and, on the Lys Front, Neuve Eglise.</p>
<p id="N83283"><span class="theatre">Macedonian Front</span>:—The British gain ground on the right bank of the Vardar.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-09-02" id="N83289">Sept. 2 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N83294"><span class="theatre">Arras Front</span>:—The Canadians with other British troops break through the Drocourt-Quéant switch line on a front of six miles.</p>
<p id="N83300">The French capture Neuilly and Terny Sorny.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-09-03" id="N83303">Sept. 3 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N83308">The British widen the breach in the Hindenburg defences, capture Drocourt, and advance on Inchy and Mœuvres; this marks the end of the Battle of the Scarpe<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 26)</span>, in which the British captures amount to 200 guns and over 16,000 prisoners.</p>
<p id="N83315">The Germans evacuate Lens.</p>
<p id="N83318">The French cross the Somme at Epanancourt.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-09-04" id="N83321">Sept. 4 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N83326">The British make progress toward Cambrai, exerting pressure on the retiring enemy; they capture Ecourt and reach the outskirts of Mœuvres; on the Lys Front they capture Ploegsteert village.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-09-05" id="N83329">Sept. 5 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N83334">The French strike north-east of Noyon towards St. Quentin; on the Soissons Front they reach the Aisne from Condé to Vieil-Arcy.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-09-06" id="N83337">Sept. 6 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N83342">Between the Somme Canal and the Oise the French capture the Autrécourt <i><span class="vessel">massif</span></i>, Ham, and the railway junction at Chauny.</p>
<p id="N83348">The Germans retreat rapidly from the line of the Somme south of Péronne towards the Hindenburg line from which they launched their offensive on March 21.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-09-07" id="N83351">Sept. 7 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N83356">The German retreat, pressed by the French, towards St. Quentin, La Fère, and Laon continues.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-09-09" id="N83359">Sept. 9 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N83364">The British reach Gouzeaucourt and Epéhy.</p>
<p id="N83367">The French cross the Crozat Canal.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-09-11" id="N83370">Sept. 11 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N83375">The British capture Vermand and Vendelles, north-west of St. Quentin; south-west of La Bassée they capture the 'Railway Triangle.'</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-09-12" id="N83378">Sept. 12 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N83383">The Americans, under <span class="person">General Pershing</span>, attack both flanks of the St. Mihiel salient (the Battle of St. Mihiel): they capture Thiaucourt and other important positions with 8000 prisoners.</p>
<p id="N83386">The Battle of Havrincourt and Epéhy begins<span class="ref"> (see Sept. 18)</span>: the British capture Mœuvres, Havrincourt, Trescault, and Gouzeaucourt Wood.</p>
<p id="N83393">West of St. Quentin the British take Holnon Wood and the French capture Savy.</p>
<p id="N83396">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Sarnia</span></i> (armed boarding-steamer) is sunk by a submarine in the Mediterranean.</p>
<p id="N83402">The Union Castle liner <i><span class="vessel">Galway Castle</span></i> is sunk by a submarine (154 lives lost).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-09-13" id="N83408">Sept. 13 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N83413">The Battle of St. Mihiel ends in the complete capture of the salient by the Americans, with 15,000 prisoners and 200 guns.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-09-14" id="N83416">Sept. 14 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N83421"><span class="theatre">The Caspian</span>:—The British evacuate Baku<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 4)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-09-15" id="N83431">Sept. 15 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N83436">The Austrian Government issues a 'Peace Note'; Germany offers peace terms to Belgium.</p>
<p id="N83439">The Germans, after evacuating the St. Mihiel salient, retire on a front of 33 miles, pressed by the Americans and the French, towards the Conflans-Metz-Longwy railway.</p>
<p id="N83442"><span class="theatre">Macedonian Front</span>:—The Battle of the Vardar begins, an offensive being launched by the Serbians and the French south-east of Monastir<span class="ref"> (see Sept. 30)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-09-16" id="N83452">Sept. 16 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N83457"><span class="theatre">Macedonian Front</span>:—The Serbians and the French advance on a front of 16 miles to an average depth of 4½ miles; they capture over 4000 prisoners and 30 guns.</p>
<p id="N83463">An aeroplane raid on Paris (6 killed): two of the raiders are brought down.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-09-17" id="N83466">Sept. 17 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N83471"><span class="theatre">Macedonian Front</span>:—The advance of the Allies continues and develops; the French and the Serbians reach the Tcherna; the movement extends to a front of over 20 miles and attains a maximum depth of over 12 miles.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-09-18" id="N83477">Sept. 18 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N83482">The end of the Battle of Havrincourt and Epéhy<span class="ref"> (see Sept. 12)</span>: strong German counterattacks are repulsed; and Mœuvres, which had been lost, is retaken by the British. In this battle the British 3rd and 4th Armies have captured the outer Hindenburg defences, with nearly 12,000 prisoners and 100 guns.</p>
<p id="N83489"><span class="theatre">Macedonian Front</span>:—Serbian cavalry advance rapidly on the Tcherna Front; British and Greek troops attack east and west of Lake Doiran and advance against fierce resistance.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-09-19" id="N83495">Sept. 19 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N83500"><span class="theatre">Macedonian Front</span>:—The Serbians and the French advance rapidly, at many points in pursuit of a routed enemy; British attacks are stubbornly resisted.</p>
<p id="N83506"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—<span class="person">General Allenby</span> launches an offensive in great strength; he breaks the Turkish defences near the coast on a front of 16 miles and his infantry and cavalry advance rapidly through the breach; the infantry reach Tul Keram, the cavalry strike towards Shechem and Beisan to cut off the enemy's retreat; nearer the Jordan the British attack and advance against a stiffer resistance.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-09-20" id="N83512">Sept. 20 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N83517">The French capture Benay, south of St. Quentin.</p>
<p id="N83520"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—The battle develops into a decisive victory: British cavalry enter Beisan and Nazareth.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-09-21" id="N83526">Sept. 21 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N83531"><span class="theatre">Macedonian Front</span>:—Serbian and French forces reach the Vardar in the direction of Negotin.</p>
<p id="N83537"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—The British infantry reach the line Bir Asur—Samaria—Beit Dejan; captures to date exceed 18,000 prisoners and 120 guns.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-09-22" id="N83543">Sept. 22 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N83548"><span class="theatre">Macedonian Front</span>:—The Bulgarians are in full retreat along the whole line between Monastir and Lake Doiran; the Allies capture Ghevgeli.</p>
<p id="N83554"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—<span class="person">General Allenby</span> reports the complete destruction of the Turkish 7th and 8th Armies.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-09-23" id="N83560">Sept. 23 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N83565"><span class="theatre">Macedonian Front</span>:—The French capture Prilep.</p>
<p id="N83571"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—The British capture Acre and Haifa and, east of the Jordan, Es Salt; Arab forces capture Maan.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-09-24" id="N83577">Sept. 24 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N83582"><span class="theatre">Macedonian Front</span>:—The Bulgarians retreat in disorder beyond Veles.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-09-25" id="N83588">Sept. 25 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N83593"><span class="theatre">Macedonian Front</span>:—The Serbians capture Ishtip and Veles; the British enter Bulgaria near Kosturino; the Bulgarian Government proposes an Armistice.</p>
<p id="N83599"><span class="theatre">Palestine</span>:—The British advance continues with increasing rapidity: Tiberias, on the Sea of Galilee, and Amman, on the Hedjaz railway, are occupied; captures to date approximate 45,000 prisoners and 265 guns.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-09-26" id="N83605">Sept. 26 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N83610">The Americans and the French attack in the region of the Argonne on a front of over 40 miles, from the Meuse to the Suippe: Montfaucon, Varennes, and many villages are captured; the advance attains an average depth of several miles.</p>
<p id="N83613"><span class="theatre">Macedonian Front</span>:—Strumnitza is occupied by the British.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-09-27" id="N83619">Sept. 27 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N83624">The Battle of Cambrai and the Hindenburg Line begins<span class="ref"> (see Oct. 5)</span>: the British attack in front of Cambrai, break through the Hindenburg defences, and capture Beaucamp, Graincourt, Bourlon Wood, and other important positions, with over 10,000 prisoners and 200 guns.</p>
<p id="N83631"><span class="theatre">The Argonne Front</span>:—The Americans and French make further progress; the number of prisoners to date exceeds 23,000.</p>
<p id="N83637"><span class="theatre">Palestine Front</span>:—Arab forces capture Deraa.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-09-28" id="N83643">Sept. 28 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N83648">The Fourth Battle of Ypres: the Belgians attack from Dixmude to Ypres, the British from Ypres to Ploegsteert; very rapid progress is made by the Belgians, who capture the whole of Houthulst Forest; the British advance on their right beyond the furthest points reached by them in 1917.</p>
<p id="N83651"><span class="theatre">The Argonne Front</span>:—The French capture Somme-Py and Maure; the Americans reach Brieulles and Exermont.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-09-29" id="N83657">Sept. 29 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N83662">The British capture Messines and the Messines Ridge; Dixmude is occupied by the Belgians; the Allied front is carried to the neighbourhood of Roulers, Courtrai, and Menin, an important salient being thus driven into the enemy's northern front which endangers his positions on the Belgian coast: this ends the Fourth Battle of Ypres.</p>
<p id="N83665"><span class="theatre">Cambrai—St. Quentin Front</span>:—The British, assisted by the 2nd American Corps, reach the outskirts of Cambrai and carry an important section of the Hindenburg defences between Cambrai and St. Quentin.</p>
<p id="N83671">In the Oise-Aisne area the French reach the line of the Ailette.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-09-30" id="N83674">Sept. 30 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N83679"><span class="theatre">Serbia</span>:—The Battle of the Vardar<span class="ref"> (see Sept. 15)</span> ends in complete victory for the Allies; the French capture Uskub.</p>
<p id="N83689">An Armistice (signed on the previous day) comes into force between the Entente Powers and Bulgaria.</p>
<p id="N83692"><span class="theatre">Palestine Front</span>:—Damascus is captured by British and Arab forces.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-10-01" id="N83698">Oct. 1 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N83703">The resignation of <span class="person">Count Hertling</span>, the German Imperial Chancellor, is announced<span class="ref"> (see Nov. 1, 1917)</span>.</p>
<p id="N83710">The French capture St. Quentin.</p>
<p id="N83713"><span class="theatre">The Argonne Front</span>:—The French advance on a front of 14 miles and capture Vaux, Autry, Condé, and Binarville.</p>
<p id="N83719"><span class="theatre">Albania</span>:—The Italians recapture Berat<span class="ref"> (see Aug. 26)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-10-02" id="N83729">Oct. 2 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N83734">The British capture Ledeghem and cross the Lys between Werwicq and Comines.</p>
<p id="N83737">The British break through a further line of the enemy defences between Cambrai and St. Quentin.</p>
<p id="N83740">The Germans retreat rapidly between the Vesle and the Aisne, from Rheims westward.</p>
<p id="N83743"><span class="theatre">The Adriatic</span>:—Italian and British naval forces attack Durazzo and destroy it as a naval base.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-10-03" id="N83749">Oct. 3 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N83754"><span class="person">Prince Max of Baden</span> succeeds <span class="person">Count Hertling</span> as German Imperial Chancellor<span class="ref"> (see Nov. 9)</span>.</p>
<p id="N83761">Armentières is occupied by the British.</p>
<p id="N83764">The British attack on an eight-mile front north of St. Quentin and make progress.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-10-04" id="N83767">Oct. 4 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N83772">A Note from the German Government to <span class="person">President Wilson</span> proposes that peace negotiations should be opened on the basis of his 'fourteen points'.</p>
<p id="N83775"><span class="person">King Ferdinand of Bulgaria</span> abdicates in favour of his son <span class="person">Prince Boris</span>.</p>
<p id="N83778">The British advance east and south of Armentières.</p>
<p id="N83781">The Americans renew their offensive between the Meuse and the Argonne and make progress.</p>
<p id="N83784">The Japanese liner <i><span class="vessel">Hiramo Maru</span></i> is sunk off the Irish coast with a loss of 292 lives.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-10-05" id="N83790">Oct. 5 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N83795">The British advance east of the new breach they have made in the Hindenburg line and capture Montbrehain, Beaurevoir, and high ground further north: this marks the end of the Battle of Cambrai and the Hindenburg Line<span class="ref"> (see Sept. 27)</span>, by which victory, the main Hindenburg defences having been breached, the British directly threaten the enemy's chief line of communications.</p>
<p id="N83802">The French advance on a front of 25 miles east of Rheims: they capture Fort Brimont, Nogent l'Abasse, and the Moronvilliers Ridge; the German retreat in this sector develops.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-10-06" id="N83805">Oct. 6 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N83810">The British capture Fresnoy (north of the Scarpe, opposite Douai).</p>
<p id="N83813">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Otranto</span></i> (armed merchant cruiser), carrying United States troops, is sunk in a collision (431 lives lost).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-10-07" id="N83819">Oct. 7 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N83824">North of the Scarpe the British capture Oppy and Biache St. Vaast.</p>
<p id="N83827">North-east of St. Quentin the French capture Remancourt.</p>
<p id="N83830">The French capture Berry-au-Bac (north-west of Rheims).</p>
<p id="N83833"><span class="theatre">Palestine Front</span>:—The British occupy Sidon; the French occupy Beirut.</p>
<p id="N83839"><span class="theatre">Albania</span>:—The Italians capture Elbasan.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-10-08" id="N83845">Oct. 8 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N83850">The Second Battle of Le Cateau<span class="ref"> (see Oct. 10)</span>: the British 3rd and 4th Armies, with the 30th American Division, attack and make rapid progress on a front of 17 miles from Sequehart to south of Cambrai.</p>
<p id="N83857">The French make important progress in Champagne, and the French and Americans east of the Meuse.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-10-09" id="N83860">Oct. 9 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N83865">The British capture Cambrai and advance upon Le Cateau.</p>
<p id="N83868">The French advance east of St. Quentin.</p>
<p id="N83871">In the valley of the Aisne the French capture Grand-Ham and Lançon.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-10-10" id="N83874">Oct. 10 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N83879">The British carry the whole Cambrai—Le Cateau road and enter Le Cateau; this ends the Second Battle of Le Cateau<span class="ref"> (see Oct. 8)</span>, by which the enemy is driven to the line of the Selle.</p>
<p id="N83886">On the front north of Arras the British advance rapidly after the retiring enemy towards Douai.</p>
<p id="N83889">The French reach the line of the Oise east of St. Quentin.</p>
<p id="N83892">Serbia (where the advance of the Allies continues against the Austro-Germans):—The French occupy Prishtina.</p>
<p id="N83895">The Irish mail boat <i><span class="vessel">Leinster</span></i> is sunk by a submarine between Kingstown and Holyhead with a loss of 527 lives.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-10-11" id="N83901">Oct. 11 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N83906">The German retirement develops in the south, forced by the threat of the Le Cateau salient: the Germans evacuate the Chemin-des-Dames, and, further east, the line of the Suippe; the French and Americans advance, pressing the retreat, on a front of 37 miles.</p>
<p id="N83909"><span class="theatre">Serbia</span>:—The French capture Prisrend.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-10-12" id="N83915">Oct. 12 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N83920"><span class="theatre">Serbia</span>:—The Serbians recapture Nish<span class="ref"> (see Nov. 5, 1915)</span>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-10-13" id="N83930">Oct. 13 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N83935">The British reach the west bank of the Sensée Canal near Douai.</p>
<p id="N83938">The Germans retire on a front of a hundred miles, from the Oise opposite St. Quentin to the Argonne; they evacuate St. Gobain Forest and the bend of the Aisne facing Rethel; the French capture Laon and La Fère.</p>
<p id="N83941"><span class="theatre">Palestine Front</span>:—The British capture Tripoli.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-10-14" id="N83947">Oct. 14 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N83952">The British, French, and Belgians renew the offensive in the north between Dixmude and the Lys: rapid progress is made; Roulers and Iseghem are captured.</p>
<p id="N83955">The French capture Sissomme on the 'Hunding' line.</p>
<p id="N83958"><span class="theatre">Serbia</span>:—Ipek and Novi Bazar are occupied by the Allies.</p>
<p id="N83964"><span class="theatre">Albania</span>:—The Italians capture Durazzo.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-10-15" id="N83970">Oct. 15 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N83975"><span class="person">President Wilson</span>'s reply to Germany's peace overtures is published.</p>
<p id="N83978">The British capture Menin, in the northern offensive; south-west of Lille, they cross the Haute Deule Canal.</p>
<p id="N83981"><span class="theatre">Palestine Front</span>:—Homs, 80 miles north of Damascus, is occupied by the British.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-10-16" id="N83987">Oct. 16 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N83992"><span class="theatre">The Northern Offensive</span>:—The British 2nd Army (Plumer) captures Werwick, Comines, Halluin, and Wevelghem, and reaches the outskirts of Courtrai; the French and the Belgians capture Ingelmunster and Lichtervelde and outflank Thourout.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-10-17" id="N83998">Oct. 17 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N84003">Owing to the threat caused by the Allied advance in Central Belgium, the Germans begin to retire from the Belgian coast north of the salient and, below the salient, to the line of the Scheldt; in consequence, Ostend, Douai, and Lille fall to the Allies (Ostend is occupied by a British naval detachment under <span class="person">Sir Roger Keyes</span> and by Belgian troops; Douai by the British 1st Army under <span class="person">General Horne</span>; Lille is surrounded and captured by the British 5th Army under <span class="person">General Birdwood</span>). The King and Queen of the Belgians visit Ostend.</p>
<p id="N84006">Further south, the Battle of the Selle begins<span class="ref"> (see Oct. 25)</span>: the British 4th Army, with the 2nd American Corps, attacks the line of the Selle; south of Le Cateau the passage of the river is forced, and the capture of Le Cateau is completed. The French advance in cooperation on the right, south of Bohain.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-10-18" id="N84013">Oct. 18 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N84018">On the Belgian coast the Allies occupy Blankenberghe; north-east of Courtrai the British cross the Sensée; further south the British occupy Roubaix and Tourcoing.</p>
<p id="N84021">In the Battle of the Selle, British and American troops make further progress from Le Cateau southwards to east of Bohain; they capture Ribeauville and Wassigny. North of the Sensée Canal, Denain is captured by the British 1st Army.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-10-19" id="N84024">Oct. 19 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N84029">Zeebrugge and Bruges are captured by the Belgians.</p>
<p id="N84032">The French, operating between the Oise and the Serre, break the 'Hunding' line on a front of three miles.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-10-20" id="N84035">Oct. 20 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N84040">The Belgian coast is completely cleared of the Germans, who retire at a number of points on the whole front between the Dutch frontier and Valenciennes.</p>
<p id="N84043">In Central Belgium, the British 2nd Army approaches the Scheldt.</p>
<p id="N84046"><span class="theatre">The Selle Front</span>:—The British attack from Denain to Le Cateau and carry the line of the river.</p>
<p id="N84052"><span class="theatre">Serbian Front</span>:—French and Serbian forces approach the Danube near the Roumanian border.</p>
<p id="N84058">The British monitor <span class="notation">M21</span> is mined off Ostend.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-10-21" id="N84061">Oct. 21 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N84066">The Germans temporarily gain the protection of water (the Scheldt and its canals and other waterways) from the Dutch frontier to the neighbourhood of Valenciennes.</p>
<p id="N84069">The British 5th Army reaches Tournai.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-10-22" id="N84072">Oct. 22 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N84077">The French and Belgians advance upon Ghent; they cross the Lys Canal.</p>
<p id="N84080">The British 1st Army enters the western outskirts of Valenciennes.</p>
<p id="N84083">Further south the French advance on the River Serre Front.</p>
<p id="N84086"><span class="theatre">Serbian Front</span>:—The French occupy Negotin.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-10-23" id="N84092">Oct. 23 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N84097">The British 3rd and 4th Armies attack on a twenty-mile front north-east of Le Cateau; they advance to a depth of four miles. The British 1st Army, advancing between Tournai and Valenciennes, captures Bruay, Bleharies, and Espain.</p>
<p id="N84100">Further south the French cross the Souche against strong resistance.</p>
<p id="N84103"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamian Front</span>:—The British advance (east of the Tigris) along the road Kifri—Kirkuk—Alton Keupri.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-10-24" id="N84109">Oct. 24 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N84114">The British 3rd and 4th Armies advance between the Scheldt and the Sambre; they approach Landrecies and the Forest of Mormal.</p>
<p id="N84117"><span class="theatre">Italy</span>:—The Allies launch an offensive on a wide front against the Austrian positions in the Trentino and on the Middle Piave; the Italians capture Monte Solarolo, the French Monte Sisemol; the British attack to force a crossing of the Piave.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-10-25" id="N84123">Oct. 25 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N84128">The British 1st Army advances north of Valenciennes; the British 3rd Army captures eight miles of the Valenciennes-Avesnes railway: this ends the Battle of the Selle<span class="ref"> (see Oct. 17)</span>, which has forced the Germans from the line of the river, driven a new salient into their front, and cut their chief lateral communication, the Valenciennes-Metz railway. Captures in the battle amount to 21,000 prisoners and over 450 guns.</p>
<p id="N84135">The French attack and advance on a front of twenty-five miles between the rivers Oise, Serre, Souche, and Aisne.</p>
<p id="N84138"><span class="theatre">Italy</span>:—<span class="person">Lord Cavan</span>, in command of the 10th Army (of British and Italians), crosses the Piave against fierce resistance.</p>
<p id="N84144"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamian Front</span>:—The British capture Kirkuk<span class="ref"> (see May 24)</span> and force the passage of the Lesser Zab.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-10-26" id="N84154">Oct. 26 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N84159"><span class="person">General Ludendorff</span>, the German First Quartermaster-General, resigns.</p>
<p id="N84162">The British make progress south of Valenciennes.</p>
<p id="N84165"><span class="theatre">Palestine Front</span>:—British and Arab forces capture Aleppo; by this the conquest of Syria is completed and the Baghdad railway cut.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-10-27" id="N84171">Oct. 27 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N84176">Austria asks for an Armistice, which is refused.</p>
<p id="N84179">The Germans retreat before the French between the Oise and the Aisne towards Hirson.</p>
<p id="N84182"><span class="theatre">Italy</span>:—<span class="person">Lord Cavan</span>'s army advances several miles east of the Piave.</p>
<p id="N84188"><span class="theatre">Albania</span>:—The Italians capture the port of Alessio.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-10-28" id="N84194">Oct. 28 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N84199">An Allied Conference opens at Versailles.</p>
<p id="N84202">The Italians cross the Piave in the Montello area.</p>
<p id="N84205"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamian Front</span>:—<span class="person">General Marshall</span> captures Kalat Shergat on the Tigris.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-10-29" id="N84211">Oct. 29 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N84216"><span class="theatre">Italy</span>:—The Allies advance rapidly against the yielding Austrians from the Brenta Valley to the sea; <span class="person">Lord Cavan</span>'s army forces the passage of the Monticano north of Oderzo; the Allies enter Asiago.</p>
<p id="N84222"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamian Front</span>:—<span class="person">General Marshall</span> attacks and routs the Turks five miles north of Kalat Shergat.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-10-30" id="N84228">Oct. 30 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N84233">A Czecho-Slovak State is proclaimed at Prague.</p>
<p id="N84236"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamian Front</span>:—The remaining Turkish forces on the Tigris surrender to <span class="person">General Marshall</span>; the number of prisoners captured, including those taken in the last seven days' fighting, exceeds 11,000. This ends the Tigris campaign.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-10-31" id="N84242">Oct. 31 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N84247">An Armistice (signed on the previous day) comes into force between the Entente Powers and Turkey.</p>
<p id="N84250"><span class="person">Count Tisza</span> is assassinated.</p>
<p id="N84253">The Hungarian National Government at Budapest assumes power and proclaims Hungary a Republic; this ends the Dual Monarchy.</p>
<p id="N84256"><span class="theatre">Italy</span>:—In the plains, the Austrian disorderly retreat becomes a rout; the Italians approach the Tagliamento in pursuit; in the Trentino, the Italians also advance rapidly against the disorganised enemy. The Austrian dreadnought and flagship <i><span class="vessel">Viribus Unitis</span></i> is sunk at Pola by an Italian naval motor boat.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-11-01" id="N84265">Nov. 1 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N84270">The Battle of the Sambre begins<span class="ref"> (see Nov. 11)</span>; the British attack south of Valenciennes, force the passage of the Rhonelle, capture Maresches, Aulnoy, and other villages, and reach the southern outskirts of Valenciennes.</p>
<p id="N84273">In Belgium, British, French, and American troops advance and reach the Scheldt in the neighbourhood of Gavere, ten miles south of Ghent.</p>
<p id="N84276">Between the Aisne and the Meuse American and French troops attack and advance.</p>
<p id="N84279"><span class="theatre">Italy</span>:—The Austrian rout continues along the whole line from the Venetian Alps to the sea.</p>
<p id="N84285"><span class="theatre">Serbia</span>:—Belgrade is reoccupied by the Serbians.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-11-02" id="N84291">Nov. 2 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N84296">The British complete the capture of Valenciennes.</p>
<p id="N84299">The French capture Semuy and the south bank of the Canal des Ardennes from Semuy to Neuville; the Argonne Forest is completely cleared of the enemy; the Americans advance rapidly in the Meuse sector.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-11-03" id="N84302">Nov. 3 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N84307">The sailors of the German Fleet at Kiel mutiny.</p>
<p id="N84310">The Belgians advance south of the Dutch frontier and capture Baasvelde and Steydinge.</p>
<p id="N84313">Between the Upper Aisne and the Meuse the Americans and French advance rapidly on a front of thirty miles.</p>
<p id="N84316">Italian troops enter Trent and Udine; Italian military and naval forces occupy Trieste.</p>
<p id="N84319"><span class="theatre">Mesopotamian Front</span>:—The British occupy Mosul.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-11-04" id="N84325">Nov. 4 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N84330">An Armistice (signed on the previous day) comes into force between the Entente Powers and Austria.</p>
<p id="N84333">Revolution spreads in Germany.</p>
<p id="N84336">The British 1st, 3rd, and 4th Armies, in conjunction with <span class="person">General Débeney</span>'s Army on their right, attack on a front of over thirty miles, from east of Valenciennes to Guise: the British force the passage of the Sambre-Oise Canal; they capture Landrecies, the Forest of Mormal, and Le Quesnoy with its garrison; the French make equally rapid progress.</p>
<p id="N84339">On the Aisne—Meuse Front the French reach the line of the Ardennes Canal and capture Le Chesne; the Americans approach Beaumont and Stenay.</p>
<p id="N84342"><span class="theatre">Northern Albania</span>:—The Italians occupy Scutari.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-11-05" id="N84348">Nov. 5 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N84353">The German Government is informed through <span class="person">President Wilson</span> that application for an Armistice must be made to <span class="person">Marshal Foch</span> in the usual military form.</p>
<p id="N84356">The French advance between the Oise and the Aisne towards Hirson.</p>
<p id="N84359"><span class="theatre">The Aisne—Meuse Front</span>:—The French cross the Ardennes Canal; the Americans capture Beaumont.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-11-06" id="N84365">Nov. 6 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N84370">German delegates start for the Western Front to receive the terms of Armistice from <span class="person">Marshal Foch</span> and <span class="person">Admiral Sir R. Wemyss</span>.</p>
<p id="N84373">The German retreat becomes general from the Scheldt north of Valenciennes to the Meuse at Sedan.</p>
<p id="N84376">The British 1st, 3rd, and 4th Armies pursue the enemy towards Mons, Maubeuge, and Avesnes.</p>
<p id="N84379">The French capture Vervins and Rethel.</p>
<p id="N84382">The Americans enter Sedan.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-11-07" id="N84385">Nov. 7 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N84390">The Bavarian Republic is proclaimed. Kiel and Hamburg fall into the hands of revolutionaries.</p>
<p id="N84393">The British 1st Army makes a formal entry into Valenciennes.</p>
<p id="N84396">The British capture Bavai and reach Haumont (in the valley of the Sambre).</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-11-08" id="N84399">Nov. 8 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N84404">The German delegates receive the terms of Armistice of the Allies.</p>
<p id="N84407"><span class="person">Prince Max of Baden</span>, the German Imperial Chancellor, resigns.</p>
<p id="N84410">The revolutionary movement spreads rapidly through Germany.</p>
<p id="N84413">The British capture Maubeuge, enter Tournai, cross the Scheldt south of it, capture Condé and Avesnes, and advance on Mons.</p>
<p id="N84416">The French advance towards Mézières and Charleville.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-11-09" id="N84419">Nov. 9 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N84424"><span class="person">The Kaiser</span> abdicates and flies to Holland.</p>
<p id="N84427"><span class="person">Herr Ebert</span> succeeds <span class="person">Prince Max</span> as Chancellor<span class="ref"> (see Oct. 3)</span>.</p>
<p id="N84434">The pursuit of the enemy by the Allies continues.</p>
<p id="N84437">H.M.S. <i><span class="vessel">Britannia</span></i> (battleship) is sunk by a submarine off Cape Trafalgar.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-11-10" id="N84443">Nov. 10 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N84448">The French occupy Hirson, surround Mézières, and cross the Meuse.</p>
<p id="N84451">The Americans advance towards Montmédy and the Briey basin.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-11-11" id="N84454">Nov. 11 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N84459">The Belgians enter Ghent; the British (3rd Canadian Division) enter Mons at dawn.</p>
<p id="N84462">The Armistice with Germany is signed in the Forest of Compiègne, near the Chateau Francport (in the train of <span class="person">Marshal Foch</span>), at 5<small>A.M.</small>Fighting ceases at 11<small>A.M.</small></p>
<hr class="chap"/>

<p id="N84473"><i>Note.</i>—The Battle of the Sambre struck at and broke the enemy's last important lateral communications, turned his positions on the Scheldt, and forced him to retreat rapidly from Courtrai. This victory completed the great strategical aim of the Allies, viz. to divide the enemy's forces into two parts, one on each side of the great natural barrier of the Ardennes. The pursuit of the beaten enemy all along the Allied line was only stopped by the Armistice.</p>
</div>

<hr class="chap"/>
<h2><a name="The_Chief_Events_connected_with_the_War" id="The_Chief_Events_connected_with_the_War"><span class="smcap">The Chief Events connected with the War, between the Signing of the Armistice on the 11th November 1918 and the Signature on the 28th June 1919 of the Treaty of Peace with Germany.</span></a></h2>

<hr class="chap"/>
<h2><a name="eighteens" id="eighteens">1918</a></h2>

<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-11-12" id="N84500">Nov. 12 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N84505">The <span class="person">Emperor Karl</span> of Austria abdicates.</p>
<p id="N84508">The Allied fleets pass through the Dardanelles, British and Indian troops occupying the forts.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-11-13" id="N84511">Nov. 13 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N84516">The Allied fleets reach Constantinople.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-11-14" id="N84519">Nov. 14 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N84524"><span class="theatre">East Africa</span>:—The last of the German forces surrender, in compliance with the terms of the Armistice, on the Chambezi River in Northern Rhodesia.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-11-17" id="N84530">Nov. 17 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N84535">In accordance with the terms of the Armistice, the advance of the Allies on the Western Front begins.</p>
<p id="N84538"><span class="theatre">The Caspian</span>:—British and Russian troops occupy Baku.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-11-18" id="N84544">Nov. 18 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N84549">Belgian troops enter Brussels.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-11-19" id="N84552">Nov. 19 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N84557"><span class="person">General Pétain</span>, created a Marshal of France on this day, formally enters Metz at the head of French troops.</p>
<p id="N84560">Belgian troops enter Antwerp.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-11-21" id="N84563">Nov. 21 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N84568">British troops enter Namur.</p>
<p id="N84571">The first and main instalment of the German High Sea Fleet (5 battle-cruisers, 9 battleships, 7 light cruisers, and 49 destroyers) surrenders to <span class="person">Admiral Sir David Beatty</span> off the Firth of Forth.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-11-22" id="N84574">Nov. 22 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N84579">King Albert re-enters Brussels after four years of exile.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-11-25" id="N84582">Nov. 25 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N84587"><span class="person">Marshal Foch</span> makes a ceremonial entry into Strasbourg.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-11-27" id="N84590">Nov. 27 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N84595">The last German troops leave Belgium.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-11-28" id="N84598">Nov. 28 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N84603"><span class="person">The Kaiser</span> formally abdicates the crown of Prussia and the German Imperial crown.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-12-01" id="N84606">Dec. 1 (Sun.)</p>
<p id="N84611">British troops cross the German frontier.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-12-02" id="N84614">Dec. 2 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N84619"><span class="person">Marshal Foch</span>, <span class="person">M. Clemenceau</span>, <span class="person">Signor Orlando</span>, and <span class="person">Baron Sonnino</span> visit London and receive a public welcome.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-12-06" id="N84622">Dec. 6 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N84627">British troops enter Cologne.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1918-12-12" id="N84630">Dec. 12 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N84635">British troops cross the Rhine and occupy the Cologne bridge-head.</p>
</div>

<h2><a name="nineteen" id="nineteen">1919</a></h2>

<div>
<p class="date" content="1919-01-18" id="N84645">Jan. 18 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N84650">The Peace Conference (the 'Conference of Paris') is opened by <span class="person">M. Poincaré</span>, President of the French Republic, at the Quai d'Orsay; <span class="person">M. Clemenceau</span> is unanimously elected Chairman. On the same date, forty-eight years earlier (Jan. 18, 1871), the German Empire was proclaimed in the Galerie des Glaces, Versailles.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1919-02-11" id="N84653">Feb. 11 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N84658"><span class="person">Herr Ebert</span> is elected first President of the German Republic.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1919-02-12" id="N84661">Feb. 12 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N84666"><span class="person">Herr Scheidemann</span>, the first German Prime Minister, forms a Cabinet.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1919-03-25" id="N84669">Mar. 25 (Tues.)</p>
<p id="N84674">To draw up the Treaties of Peace a Council of Four (<span class="person">President Wilson</span>, <span class="person">Mr. Lloyd George</span>, <span class="person">M. Clemenceau</span>, <span class="person">Signor Orlando</span>—the 'Big Four') is substituted for the Council of Ten.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1919-04-23" id="N84677">April 23 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N84682"><span class="person">President Wilson</span> issues a public statement with regard to Fiume, which concludes with an appeal to the people of Italy as distinct from their Government.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1919-04-24" id="N84685">April 24 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N84690"><span class="person">Signor Orlando</span> leaves Paris for Italy as a protest against <span class="person">President Wilson</span>'s attitude and his published message on the Fiume question.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1919-04-28" id="N84693">April 28 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N84698">The League of Nations is created by the adoption at the Peace Conference of the amended League of Nations Covenant.</p>
<p id="N84701">The Peace Conference adopts the 'Labour Charter,' viz. those sections of the Peace Treaty which create an International Organisation to deal with the needs and problems of Labour.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1919-05-07" id="N84704">May 7 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N84709">The Peace Terms are presented to the German delegates at the Trianon Palace Hotel, Versailles.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1919-06-02" id="N84712">June 2 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N84717">The Allied Terms of Peace with Austria, incomplete in certain respects, are handed to the Austrian delegates at St. Germain.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1919-06-19" id="N84720">June 19 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N84725"><span class="theatre">Italy</span>:—<span class="person">Signor Orlando</span> and his Cabinet resign.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1919-06-20" id="N84731">June 20 (Fri.)</p>
<p id="N84736">The German Ministry under <span class="person">Herr Scheidemann</span> resign, having disagreed as to acceptance of the Peace Terms.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1919-06-21" id="N84739">June 21 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N84744">The Germans scuttle their fleet interned at Scapa Flow.</p>
<p id="N84747">A new German Ministry is formed with <span class="person">Herr Bauer</span> as Premier. The German National Assembly debates the Peace Treaty, and resolves in favour of signature by 237 votes to 138.</p>
<p id="N84750"><span class="theatre">Italy</span>:—<span class="person">Signor Nitti</span> forms a Ministry.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1919-06-23" id="N84756">June 23 (Mon.)</p>
<p id="N84761">The Government of the German Republic declares 'that it is ready to accept and sign the conditions of peace imposed by the Allied and Associated Governments.'</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1919-06-28" id="N84764">June 28 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N84769">The Treaty of Peace between the Allied and Associated Powers and the German Republic is signed in the Galerie des Glaces, Versailles, the ceremony beginning at 3<small>P.M.</small>.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1919-09-10" id="N84775">Sept. 10 (Wed.)</p>
<p id="N84780">The Treaty of Peace between the Allied and Associated Powers (<em>except Roumania and Jugo-Slavia</em>) and Austria is signed in the Stone Age Hall in the Château de Saint Germain.</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="date" content="1919-11-27" id="N84786">Nov. 27 (Thur.)</p>
<p id="N84791">The Treaty of Peace between the Allied and Associated Powers (<em>except Serbia and Roumania</em>) and Bulgaria is signed at the Mairie at Neuilly-sur-Seine.</p>
</div>

<h2><a name="twenty" id="twenty">1920</a></h2>

<div>
<p class="date" content="1920-01-10" id="N84804">Jan. 10 (Sat.)</p>
<p id="N84809">The Treaty of Peace between the Allied and Associated Powers and the German Republic is formally ratified in the Clock Room in the French Foreign Office, Paris, the ceremony beginning at 4<small>P.M.</small></p>
</div>

</body>
</html>